The Project Gutenberg eBook of The towers of Titan
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: The towers of Titan


Author: Ben Bova

Illustrator: Ed Emshwiller

Release date: December 5, 2023 [eBook #72339]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, 1961

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TOWERS OF TITAN ***




        _Across the frozen cliffs they loomed--the unbelievably
       ancient towers with the unimaginable engines deep inside
      them still pouring out their endless power. Dr. Sidney Lee,
       back from living death, vowed to find the secret of ..._

                          The TOWERS of TITAN

                              By BEN BOVA

                          Illustrated by EMSH

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                     Amazing Stories January 1962.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


The landing port at Titan had not changed much in five years.

The ship settled down on the scarred blast shield, beside the same trio
of squat square buildings, and quickly disgorged its scanty quota
of cargo and a lone passenger into the flexible tube that linked the
loading hatch with the main building.

As soon as the tube was disconnected, the ship screamed off through
the murky atmosphere, seemingly glad to get away from Titan and head
back to the more comfortable and settled parts of the Solar System.

The passenger, Dr. Sidney Lee, stood by the window-wall of the main
building and watched the ship disappear into the dark sky. He was tall
and lean, seemingly all bone and tendon, with graying dark hair and
faintly haunted eyes set deep into a rough-hewn, weather-worn face.
When the ship was nothing more than another star overhead, he turned
and looked at the place.

_Five years hasn't made any difference_, he thought. The single room
of the main port building was unchanged: a little grimier, perhaps,
and a little more worn. But essentially unchanged. There were the same
turnstiles and inspection machines, the same processing and handling
gadgets for your papers and baggage, the same (it couldn't be, but they
_looked_ the same) two bored techs sitting at the far end of the room,
unwilling to lift an eyebrow unless specifically commanded to do so.

Lee walked over to the papers processor and pushed his credentials into
its slot. After a few wheezes and clanks its green light flickered
on and the papers fell into the "return" bin properly stamped and
approved. At the same time, his lone bag slid along a conveyor belt
and onto the pickup table.

With his credentials back inside his jacket and the bag in hand, Lee
looked toward the two clerks. They were studiously avoiding his eyes,
searching intently through some schedules that they kept on hand for
just such emergencies.

"Sid! Hi!"

He turned at the sound of her voice.

"I'm sorry to be late," she said, hurrying across the big empty room,
"but we never know when the Ancient Mariner is going to arrive. It's
not a matter of whether it'll be on schedule or not ... just a question
of guessing how late it's going to be."

He smiled at her. "Hello, Elaine. It's good to see you again."

She hadn't changed either, and this time he was glad of it. She was
still slim and young, her hair a reddish gold, her eyes gray-green. She
was dressed with typical casualness: comfortable boots, dark slacks and
sweater that outlined her trim figure, and a light green scarf for a
touch of color. Outwardly, at least, she seemed cheerful.

"Come on," she said, "I've got a buggy in the parking area. I wanted to
get a few more of the old gang to come out and meet you, but there's
not many of them left, and they're all pretty busy...." Her voice
trailed off.

"I didn't expect a brass band and a key to the city," Lee said. Then he
added, "You're pretty gay for a female scientist," he said.

"I'm always gay when I meet old friends again."

He said nothing.

"I wish you'd cheer up," Elaine coaxed.

"I will; give me time."

       *       *       *       *       *

They entered the parking building and got into a bubble-top car. Elaine
gunned it to life, and they slid out of the near-empty parking area,
through the pressure doors, and into Titan's unbreathable atmosphere.

"Have you been here straight through since I left?" he asked.

"No. I spent about eighteen months on Venus, slushing through the
swamps in search of ruins that couldn't possibly have survived a
century in that climate."

"And?"

"That's it," she said, shrugging. "Something ventured but nothing
found. So I asked to be returned here."

"It's got you, too, hasn't it?"

Her face became serious for the first time. "Certainly it's got me.
It's got all of us. Do you think we'd stay out here otherwise?"

"Anything new turned up?"

Elaine shook her head. "Nothing you haven't seen in the reports. Which
means nothing, really."

He lapsed into silence and watched the frozen landscape slide by as
the car raced along Titan's only highway. They crossed a bleak, frozen
plain, bluish-white in the dim twilight from the distant Sun. The stars
twinkling in the dark sky overhead made the barren scene look even
colder. The road climbed across a row of hills, and as they made a turn
around the highest bluff, Saturn came into view.

No matter how many times Lee had seen the planet, it had always
thrilled him. Now, five years later, it was still an experience.
Three times larger than the full moon as seen from Earth, daubed
with brilliant yellow, red and orange stripes, and circled about its
middle by the impossible-looking rings, Saturn hung fat and low on the
horizon, casting shadows stronger than the Sun's.

"It's a compensation, isn't it?" Elaine said.

Soon they were down on the plain again, but now it was a shattered,
broken expanse of jagged rock and ice. A greenish methane cloud drifted
over the face of Saturn, and Lee finally turned his eyes away.

"You can see the towers from here," Elaine reminded him.

"I know," he said. He could not make out any detail, but there they
were, just as they had been for--how long? Ten thousand years? A
hundred thousand? Five towers jutting straight up from the bleak plain,
clustered around a central, taller tower.

"Is the machinery still running?" he asked, pointlessly.

"Of course."

"There was some talk a year or so back about trying to stop it."

She shook her head. "They wouldn't dare."

       *       *       *       *       *

The machine had been discovered more than ten years earlier, when the
first Earthmen landed on Titan. Saturn's largest satellite was devoid
of life, a world of dark and cold, of hydrogen atmosphere and methane
clouds, of ammonia seas and ice mountains.

And there in the midst of it all stood the machine: a brazenly
unconcealed cluster of mammoth buildings, with its five stately towers
surmounted by the soaring central sixth. And within, row upon row of
unexplained machinery, fully automated, operating continuously in
perfect order.

Alien.

The discoverers soon concluded that the machine was unbelievably
old, older than the Egyptian pyramids, perhaps even older than the
Martian canals. And it was running smoothly. For untold centuries, for
uncounted millennia, it had continued to operate efficiently, tended
only by automatic machines.

A clear challenge to the space-rovers from Earth. Who made this
machine? How does it work? Why is it here? What is it doing?

As soon as its discovery was made known, the machine was visited by a
steady stream of Earthmen--physicists, archeologists, engineers of a
thousand different specialties, and soldiers, politicians, men who were
now forced to believe the inevitable. The machine was photographed,
x-rayed, blueprinted, analyzed spectroscopically, philosophically, even
theologically.

Who built it? How does it work? Why is it here?

No answers.

Dr. Sidney Lee, an anthropologist who had made a name for himself by
unraveling the history of the ruins on Mars, arrived on Titan full of
optimism and enthusiasm. Twenty months later he was taken from Titan to
a psychomedical center on Earth--completely irrational and suffering
from man's oldest dread: the unknown.

       *       *       *       *       *

Returning to the underground center that had grown over the years
near the machine, to house the living and working quarters of the
tiny scientific community on Titan, was something like returning home
for Dr. Lee. Someone had seen to it that he got his old quarters back
again. Most of the people he had known from five years ago had gone
elsewhere, but a few remained.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee spent his first few days renewing acquaintances and meeting the
new men and women. He was surprised at their youth, until he tried to
recall how he must have looked and acted when he first arrived on Titan.

"Makes you realize how time takes its toll, regardless of geriatrics,"
he said to Dr. Kimball Bennett. Official director of the center,
Bennett had called Lee into his office for a chat.

"Come on now," Bennett scoffed, "you're talking like a man of ninety.
Why, you won't need geriatrics for at least another month."

They both laughed. Bennett was a shy-looking, slender astrophysicist
who spoke softly, never seemed to exert himself, and yet commanded the
unabashed admiration of every member of the center.

"All right," Lee said. "You didn't call me to discuss my failing years.
What's on your mind?"

"Oh, I just thought it's about time you got to work. You've been
loafing around for a week now. We can't afford to feed you free
forever, you know."

"No, I guess you can't," Lee agreed, smiling.

Bennett leaned back in his chair and studied Lee for a long moment. "I
won't ask you why you wanted to come back. But I was delighted when I
saw the paperwork with your name on it. Want to know why?"

"Now I am curious."

"I want to leave Titan. I've been heading this operation for too
many years, now. I want out. And I really can't leave until I have a
top-notch man to run this little show. You're my replacement."

"As director?"

"Yes."

"Not me," Lee said, shaking his head. "I couldn't."

"Why not?"

"Why? Hell, Kim, you saw them carry me out of here five years ago. How
do you know the same thing won't happen again? How do I know it?"

A trace of a smile flickered across Bennett's face. "Look, the fact
that you returned to Titan--to this center and to that infernal machine
out there--well, that's proof enough to me that you've licked whatever
it was that caused your breakdown."

"Maybe you're satisfied," Lee countered, "but how about the rest of
the staff? How will they feel about having a reconditioned neurotic
heading the show?"

Bennett's smile broke into an open grin. "Self-pity is a terrible
thing. Do you know what those kids think of you? You're Dr. Sidney Lee,
the foremost xeno-anthropologist of the human race. You're the man who
deciphered the Martian Script, who uncovered the ruins on Tau Ceti, who
did the definitive studies on the cave man cultures on Sirius and Vega.
Your troubles here on Titan are just a six-month incident in the middle
of a dazzling career. Haven't you noticed the deference with which
they've been treating you? You're a big man on this campus."

"I don't know...."

"It won't be a lifetime job," Bennett coaxed. "In a couple of years
some of the young squirts around here will have acquired enough poise
and self-control to run the show. Then you can go on to something else."

Lee got up from his chair and paced slowly to the bookshelf that lined
one wall of the office. "Why don't you stay on for another year or so,
and then turn it over to one of the youngsters?"

Bennett wordlessly extended his arms over the desk. His hands were
trembling, almost imperceptibly, but trembling.

Lee stared at the hands. "You too?"

Bennett placed his hands palms down on the desk. "Do you think you're
the only one who worries about an alien race who can build a machine
that we can't understand after ten years of investigation and study?"

       *       *       *       *       *

The official transfer took place the following day, shortly after
breakfast. Bennett called a meeting of the six department heads and
announced that he would leave Titan on the next ship. It came as no
surprise.

"From here on, I'm just an interested observer," he said. "Dr. Lee is
in charge." He paused for a moment, then went on, "I thought this would
be a good time to review what's been going on most recently, and where
we stand."

Lee took an old pipe out of his jacket pocket and filled it while he
watched them try to decide who would talk first. The six department
heads all looked young and eager, he thought. Elaine was among them, of
course, as head of the archeology group.

After a bit of finger-pointing and head-shaking, Dr. Richards took
the floor. Head of the physics section, he had one of those open,
clear-eyed, crew-cut faces that would look young even after his hair
turned gray.

"It just so happens," he began, "that we finished a study yesterday
that may be of some slight significance." From the size of his grin,
Lee judged that the physicist was making a weak attempt to underplay
his speech.

Richards walked to the viewscreen at the far end of the room and turned
a dial. The screen flickered for a moment, then showed a chart.

"You remember from our last meeting," he said, "that our group finally
succeeded in reaching the generating unit that powers all the machinery
out there. Uh, Dr. Lee, this is something we've been working on for
more than a year. The power unit is buried in the sublevel of the main
building out there, and it's damned difficult to get to it without
tearing out other machines. We finally wormed a man down there about a
month ago."

       *       *       *       *       *

Richards turned back to the rest of the group. "This chart shows what
we've been able to learn about the power unit. Which isn't much.
There's no input to it. No batteries, no solar cells, nothing. There's
a fuel tank--at least, we think it's a fuel tank--that's sunk inside a
cryogenic magnetic coil."

Elaine spoke up. "You told us that last time. Have you been able to get
into the tank?"

Richards shook his head. "Not unless we break up the coil, which we
don't dare try. It would probably mean destroying the power unit and
stopping all the machinery. And we can't do _that_ until we're certain
of what the machinery's doing."

"We all know that," said Dr. Kulaki, a wiry Polynesian who headed the
electronics group.

"Yes. Well, we did make a very elegant experiment," Richards continued,
"a variation of Cavendish's experiment to obtain the gravitational
constant, in the Eighteenth Century...."

"Spare the history," Dr. Kurtzman said, half-smiling.

"Okay, okay," Richards said. "We determined the mass of the fuel tank,
and therefore of the fuel in it. The tank contains a degenerate gas...."

"What?"

"A degenerate gas," Richards repeated. "The stuff must weigh several
tons per spoonful."

Dr. Petchkovich, the astronomer, frowned puzzledly. "Wait a minute.
Degenerate gases are found only in the cores of certain types of
stars ... are you saying that this magnetic field they've put around
the fuel tank is strong enough to create a pressure similar to the
weight of a star?"

"Take a look at the chart," Richards said, pointing to the viewscreen.
"If you know of any other type of substance with a density like that,
I'll eat it."

There was a brief conversation, then Dr. Bennett said, "All right, Pat.
Is that all?"

"Hell no," Richards said, his cat-like grin returning. "There's more."

He tapped a button on the viewscreen control panel, and another chart
came up on the screen.

       *       *       *       *       *

"We know the power output of the generator. That was simply obtained,
since the one unit powers all the machinery in the buildings out there.
So we calculated all the known methods for obtaining power from a
degenerate gas, and checked them against the amount of fuel the system
has used up so far...."

Lee interrupted. "How do you know how much fuel has been used if you
can't get into the tank?"

Richards' grin broadened. "Oh, that's easy, Dr. Lee. We know how much a
degenerate gas should weigh, per unit volume. We know the size of the
tank, and therefore how much it can hold, when full. So we can estimate
how full the tank is simply by measuring its mass and comparing it to
the mass it would have if it were full."

"Doesn't the chemical composition of the gas have any effect on the
mass? Wouldn't uranium be heavier than hydrogen?"

"Yes, but not much. A factor of a hundred. You'll see in a minute that
it's not enough to matter at this stage of the game."

Lee nodded and the physicist went on. "Well, anyway, you can check
out our math in the report we'll issue later this month. But it turns
out that the only possible energy source for this gadget is total
annihilation of the gas particles into energy."

"Total annihilation? How?"

"That's a good question. I don't think we'll be able to answer it until
we can start taking the damned machine apart." He flicked a new graph
on the screen. "But, we can calculate how long the thing has been
running, on the basis of the fuel it's used up, and the energy rates
we've assumed...."

A slow wave of astonishment crept through the small room as, one by
one, they grasped the significance of the curving lines on the graph.

"That's right," Richards said. "Unless our rough calculations are
completely off the beam, which I doubt, the damned thing has been
operating continuously for something like ten-to-the-fifth or
ten-to-the-sixth Earth years."

A hundred thousand to a million years.

The rest of the meeting was quiet and orderly. They were all subdued
by Richards' report. _It's been running continuously for a million
years_, Lee kept thinking. _A million years._

He listened automatically as the other department heads made their
reports.

Ray Kurtzman was first. His report was actually a combined discussion
of the work that his engineering group, and Dr. Kulaki's electronics
people, had been jointly undertaking. They had tried to determine
(for the _n_th time) just what sort of power was being beamed by the
antennas atop the machine's towers. No luck. The machinery was using
power, the antennas were broadcasting _something_, but whatever it was
could not be detected by any instrument the Kurtzman and Kulaki had
applied to the problem.

Elaine gave a routine report on the latest digging expeditions that had
been sent out. No artifacts, no foundations, no remains of any sort.
Blank.

Dr. Childe, a short, sharp-voiced mathematician, gave his report on his
department's analysis of the wave patterns that were being sent out by
the antennas. The patterns had been deduced from the fluctuations in
energy consumption by the antenna equipment. Childe reported another
blank. The patterns were completely random.

"It's foolish to call them patterns at all," Childe complained. "They
look more like the ramblings of an idiot than anything produced by
intelligence."

       *       *       *       *       *

Finally, Petchkovich reported on the latest astronomical studies. The
antennas were tracking an empty section of space between the Sun and
the planet Mercury. Careful observations had shown no noticeable effect
in the widespread area where the antennas were focused.

"It is my belief," he concluded, "that the antennas were originally
focused on one of the planets, but have since become disoriented in
some way, and are now well off-target."

Kurtzman huffed. "Not very likely. If they--whoever they are--could
make this whole damned set of buildings full of machinery to operate
continuously for a million years, do you think they'd slip up on where
the antennas are pointing?"

"If it's a million years we're talking about," Petchkovich answered
slowly, "then the chances for errors are simply that much greater."

Lee decided it was time for him to step in. "Have there been any other
attempts to date the buildings or the machines? Radioactive decay
rates, or something like that?"

Elaine nodded. "It's been tried at least once or twice a year, every
year. Nothing conclusive has ever been established. The buildings are
obviously very old ... but million years...."

They all lapsed into silence.

Lee took a deep breath and began once more. "This million-year-business
throws a new light on the whole subject. Up to now, I think, we've all
been looking at this machine on a day-to-day basis. I mean, we've been
examining what it's doing _now_. It might be worth our while to sit
back a little and try to extrapolate the behavior we've observed back
over a million years."

"Could you be a bit more explicit?" Richards asked.

"I'll try. It's mostly a matter of viewpoint, I think. Let's start
looking at this machine as something that's been in operation for a
million years. Let's admit to ourselves that what we see today is only
a very small slice of the whole picture. Dr. Petchkovich, you're an
astronomer; you're accustomed to studying a star for a few months and
coming up with a story that covers perhaps billions of years. Right?"

"Yes, but this is entirely different...."

"I know. I know," Lee said. "But the line of attack isn't so different.
For instance: Dr. Childe, suppose you send your wave patterns to the
Orbital Computation Center at Earth and have the Big Brain work them
over. Do you think it might come up with something useful?"

Childe shrugged elaborately. "Maybe. If we try to extrapolate the
sample patterns we have now over a million years, maybe something will
show up."

"It'll take months to get the Big Brain's time," Elaine said. "They're
waiting in line all the way back to Mars for it."

"What are months compared to the time we've already spent?" Bennett
countered.

"Or to a million years?" Lee added.

Kulaki suddenly started to bob up and down in his chair. "Say, we might
be on the track of something here," he said. "If those circuits have
been in continuous operation for a million years ... we could learn an
awful lot about reliability...."

Lee nodded in agreement. "We have a lot to learn, that's true enough."
He cleared his throat nervously. "There's one more thing, I am about
to publish a paper ... it's a sort of a general paper, but it has some
bearing on the work going on here. I wonder if you'd be good enough to
be a tryout audience for me?"

They sat back to listen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee gave only the basic outline of his paper. He discussed his findings
among the ruins on Mars and on the lone planet circling the star Tau
Ceti; and he drew some conclusions from his investigations of the
primitive human cultures found on the planetary systems of Sirius and
Vega.

First, both Sirius and Vega have both been long known to be
comparatively young stars. Astrophysical evidence compiled from the
Twentieth Century onward, and finally geophysical data from the planets
themselves, showed that Sirius and Vega--and their planets--were
considerably less than a billion years old. By contrast, the Solar
System was known to be at least five billion years old.

Now, the development of life takes time. It took close to three billion
years for life to make its first appearance on Earth. Another two
billion years of evolution were necessary before man arose.

"If the planets circling Sirius and Vega are less than one billion
years old," Lee stated, "then the human populations of those
planets--no matter how primitive they are--_could not have originated
there_. They must have come from another planetary system. The closest
system that could have born life on its own is our Solar System."

Second, the ruins on Tau Ceti and on Mars were both definitely built
by human beings. The plans of the buildings, their furnishings and
utensils, the scant writings and pictures that survived--all were of
human origin.

"Although dating the time of destruction of these buildings is very
difficult," Lee went on, "we can definitely say two things: they were
destroyed suddenly in some immense cataclysm; and they were destroyed
at very nearly the same time, both on Mars and Tau Ceti. I hadn't
realized the correlation until this morning, but the destruction might
easily be dated at approximately one million years ago."

There was a stir of reaction at the mention of the time period.

Also, Lee told them, he had been able to partially translate one of the
folk tales of the Vegan people.

"Stripped of its nonessentials, it tells of a cataclysmic war between
the ancestors of the Vegan people and another race, mentioned only as
the Others."

He paused and looked at them, sitting around the table. They seemed
engrossed.

"The Vegan folk tales relate that the Others won an overwhelming
victory, and smashed forever their Golden Age, when they travelled
through the skies and lived in unbelievable splendor.

"I'd like to make one final point. The Vegan and Sirian peoples are
hardly human, by our standards. In addition to slight physiological
differences, they live in caves and eat shellfish and giant insects.
They do not hunt meat-bearing animals, simply because there are not
yet any meat-bearing animals on their planets. The humans on those
planets did not evolve there; they are a billion years ahead of the
natural evolution of their worlds."

Bennett spoke up. "In other words, they were originally a colony from
Earth."

"Exactly."

"That's a lot to swallow in one sitting," Patrick said, quietly.

"I know," Lee answered. "But it fits in with what we've found here.
Elaine, I'm certain that if you knew where to look, you could find on
Earth the remains of a human civilization that is more than a million
years old...."

She shook her head. "That's contrary to every known scrap of evidence
about early man. Besides, a million years of weathering would wipe out
almost anything on Earth. Wind, rain, Ice Ages, earthquakes ... it
would be impossible."

"What about the Moon?" Petchkovich asked. "There should be some
archeological evidence on the Moon that hasn't been completely
destroyed. Maybe buried under the dust or lava flows...."

"At any rate," Lee said, "I'm convinced that there was a human culture
a million years ago; that it expanded out through the Solar System and
to the stars; that it met an implacably hostile alien race; and that
the humans were utterly defeated. Nearly wiped out."

"And the machine out there?"

"It was built by the Others. It's alien. And hostile," Lee said.
"That's why we must find out what it's doing, and how."

       *       *       *       *       *

You could feel the change in attitude throughout the center after that
conference. An invisible, but almost palpable wave of tension swept
through every office, every lab, every section of the underground
community. Not everyone believed Lee's theory about the Others.
But they could never look at those strange buildings again without
wondering. What had been a puzzling, frustrating riddle took on the
attributes of a living, intelligent enemy; an enemy that mocked their
efforts to understand, to control; an enemy that seemed in every way
superior to the feeble powers of the men from Earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few days after that conference, Dr. Bennett left Titan for good. Lee
was in full command now.

He was just finishing a quick lunch at the robocafeteria when Elaine
walked by and stopped at his table.

"Hi boss. I'm on my way out to the buildings. Want to come along?"

Lee punched a button at the end of the table, and the dishes slid into
a wall receptacle. "No thanks," he said. "I've got some paperwork to
do...."

"Sid, you're going to have to come out and face it sooner or later. Why
don't you come now? There's practically nobody there."

He looked up at her. "You're not a part-time psychotech, are you?"

"No," she said, grinning. "But I wouldn't want anybody to start
thinking that you're afraid to go into the buildings. And I especially
don't want _you_ to think that."

"Okay," he said, getting up from his chair. "You're right ... as usual."

They took a lift chute to the surface bubble, a dome of clear
plastisteel that housed ground vehicles and miscellaneous outdoor
equipment. There they squirmed into pressure suits, complete with
fishbowl helmets. After checking out their oxygen tanks, heaters and
radios, they were ready to go outside.

"Want to walk?" Elaine asked.

Lee nodded.

It took him a few minutes to get accustomed to the low-gravity shuffle
that you must employ to walk on Titan, with its one-third Earth gravity.

They headed for the buildings, under the double shadows cast by the
distant Sun and the ever-present, overpowering Saturn. The buildings
loomed straight up from the dark plain, gaunt gloomy specters from a
bygone age haunting this shadow world. There were five low, square
featureless structures ringed around a central pentagonally-shaped
tower that swept upward to a series of spires and antennas. Several
doors had been cut into the outer buildings' walls by the inquiring
Earthmen. Originally, the walls had been perfectly blank.

"Did you bring a torch?" Lee asked.

Elaine shook her head. "Don't need one anymore. We installed lights
inside. They're tripped by a photocell as we cross through a doorway."

He could feel it coming on as they approached the buildings--the
tenseness, the prickling along the spine, as if a deeply-buried memory
was writhing within his mind.

Even before they entered the doorway he could sense the throbbing,
beating _purposefulness_ of the machines.

And then they were inside, surrounded by them, row on row, tier on
tier, inhuman untiring infallible machines humming, growling, whining,
filling the vast building with the rumbling power of their work.
Driving, constantly driving at their unknown tasks. Along catwalks
that snaked through the maze of machines, automatic maintenance
vehicles scurried along, stopping here for a quick adjustment, there
for replacement of a faulty part.

No matter where the two invading humans went along the twining
catwalks, the maintenance vehicles avoided them. If they stopped before
a machine that was to be serviced, the maintenance vehicle would hover
nearby, glowering at them, waiting for them to get out of the way.

       *       *       *       *       *

He could feel it again--the alienness, the lurking presence of an
intelligence that scorned the intruders from Earth. Every nerve in his
body screamed the same message: get out, get away, this thing is evil,
hostile, a weapon against all mankind. In the conference room, telling
them of his theory, he had inwardly wondered how much of it he himself
really believed. But here, in the midst of these implacably efficient
machines--he _knew_. This is the product of a cosmic hatred, the work
of those who seek to destroy man, our ancient enemy, the unknown, the
nameless Others.

"Are you all right?"

Elaine's voice in his earphones snapped him back to reality.

"Why, do I look green?"

She came up close enough so that their helmets nearly touched. "A
little green," she said, smiling. "It gives me the creeps, too. Want to
go?"

"No," he answered. "Let's see the work that's going on."

He took a firm grip on himself and went through it all, from the
combined crews of archeologists and engineers tracing wiring circuits,
to the handful of physicists conducting further tests on the power
generator buried deep in the central building's foundation.

"It goes awfully slowly," Elaine said as they trudged back to the
center.

"We're on the outside looking in," Lee said. "If we could only
determine the _purpose_ of the machinery, then the rest of it would
come pretty easily."

They returned to the surface bubble and took off their pressure suits.

"Nearly dinner time," Elaine said, as they descended to the living
area. "How about eating in my quarters?" she asked.

"Can you cook?"

"You'll find out."

       *       *       *       *       *

A few hours later, he had decided that she definitely could cook, and
that she had somehow managed to bring to Titan some of the best wine he
had tasted in years.

Now the table was folded back into the wall, and they were sitting
together on the couch, listening to music tapes.

"What's that?" he asked.

"Villa-Lobos, a Twentieth Century composer. _Bachianas Brazilieris._
Number eight, I think...."

They listened in silence for a few moments to the moody, restless music.

"Reminds me of topside, standing at the shore of the ammonia sea when a
storm is coming up," he said.

Elaine nodded. "Yes ... the wind, and the dark, and the waves...."

Abruptly, the music snapped off.

"Oh damn!" Elaine blurted. "I thought I had the thing fixed."

"Let me take a look at it," Lee said getting up from the couch.

He tinkered with the recorder for a while, to no avail. "I'm no
electronics tech, that's for sure."

Elaine shrugged. "Don't worry about it. I'll have it repaired tomorrow."

She went into the kitchenette and called back, "How about some brandy?"

"Fine," he answered.

She returned and handed him a glass.

"Ad astra," he said, as they touched glasses.

"Amen."

Elaine walked slowly away from him, swishing the liquor in her glass.
"Let's go topside and see the stars," she said, suddenly.

"H'mm?"

"Up to the bubble. Come on."

       *       *       *       *       *

So they left her one-room quarters and took the lift tube up to the
bubble. It was deserted. Overhead, Saturn was low on the horizon,
silhouetting the alien buildings. They turned to the other side of
the sky, where it was clear and dark. Thousands of stars twinkled in
the darkness; they made out Sirius and Vega, then Mars, and finally
Earth--a bright blue jewel that outshone all the others.

"I guess Jupiter's on the other side of the Sun," Lee said.

Elaine nodded. "It looks so far away," she said, staring at Earth, "and
so lonely, out there in all that emptiness."

"A psychotech would call that 'projection.'"

"I know. We're the lonely ones, aren't we?"

She was perfectly serious now.

"You know that Ruth and I have split up," he said.

"I heard ... that she left you."

He shrugged. "That's a matter of viewpoint. She got tired sitting
Earthside while I batted around the Solar System. When I told her I was
going to Vega, she called it quits."

"Couldn't she have gone with you?"

"If she had wanted to...."

"Do you still love her?" Elaine asked.

"I don't know. I don't think I know what love really is, anymore. All I
know is ... on that long trip out to Vega, when I had nothing to do but
sit and think, it wasn't Ruth I was thinking about. It was you."

"Oh...."

They talked a bit more, and finally he took her in his arms and kissed
her and she was his, at least for a little while.

       *       *       *       *       *

Weeks lapsed into months, and the work on Titan inched steadily along.
If he stopped to think about it, Lee knew that all they were doing was
scratching around the base of the problem, and making precious little
headway. _The blind men and the elephant_, he told himself. But then
he asked himself what else they could possibly do, and the answer was
always, nothing. But the machine was still there, doing whatever it
was designed to do, and he could sense the scornful laughter of its
creators as he vainly tried to understand their work. Only the thought
of Elaine, the sight of her, the touch of her, allowed him to keep his
sense of balance.

People left Titan, baffled and confused; new people arrived--eager,
full of energy, excited at the chance to tackle the unknown,
undimmed--at first--by the day-to-day frustrations of trying to unlock
a door that has no key.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee dialed his selection at the robocafeteria and waited a few moments
for the tray of food to appear at the pickup table. He had spent the
morning shut away in his office, searching months worth of reports for
some glimmer of encouragement. There was progress, of course; there was
always progress. But it was never in a direction that would take them
closer to the final answer.

And, carefully tucked into the top drawer of his desk was a nasty
yellow sheet that bore a querulous message from Earth: What is the
status of the project? Why are expenditures constantly climbing? Is a
ninety-three-man staff really needed? When can some solid results be
expected?

Lee picked an unoccupied table and sat down. As he started to eat, a
quartet of young engineers, headed by Dr. Kurtzman, came in and sat at
the next table.

"I still don't see why they keep digging," one of them was saying.
"They'll never find anything outside the buildings."

Another countered, "Look, they've got to follow every possible angle.
The only way we're ever going to understand this thing is to put
together every scrap of evidence we can find until there's enough to
form an understandable picture."

Kurtzman shook his head. "Not at all. This isn't going to be solved
by putting pieces together, like a puzzle. There's more evidence in
those buildings than we can ever hope to digest. It's not a matter
of adding up clues ... this is going to be a _gestalt_. One of these
days, somebody's going to get a few thousand million of his brain cells
turned the right way, and he'll say, "Ah-HAH!" Then we'll have
it. Until then, it's our job to keep poking around, hoping to find the
right piece of information to trigger the _gestalt_."

The first one spluttered. "But that ... that's non-scientific!"

"So?" Kurtzman asked, arching his eyebrows. "Do you see science making
any great strides around here? We're in over our heads. Intuition is
the only thing that can save us."

"If we're that bad off, we might as well quit," the first one said. "In
fact, that might be the best idea of all. Forget it and go home. Let
the damned machine run for another million years, if it wants to."

Lee could not keep quiet any longer. "That would be fine, wouldn't
it?" he said, turning on the surprised engineer. "Give it up and forget
about it, without knowing where it came from, or what it's doing, or
why."

"I didn't mean...."

"Listen to me. It's not just that the thing could be a weapon. It may
not be. But we don't know. And as long as we don't know, we've got to
keep trying to find out. Understand?"

"Yes, but...."

"And there's more at stake here than just an intellectual puzzle,"
Lee insisted. "If we turn our backs on this machine, we've turned our
backs on a basic premise of all scientific thought. If we admit that we
can't understand this machine, then we admit that there's an absolute
limit to our ability to understand the universe. We give in to the old
witch-doctor's claim that there are some things in the world that man
must not tamper with. Taboo!

"The basic nature of man and science is at stake here! We've got to
understand that machine. Our claim to the stars is tied up in it."

Lee looked up and saw that everyone in the dining hall was watching
him. He stood up.

"Sorry; I didn't mean to get so vehement," he mumbled to the engineer.
"Guess I'm a bit edgy today."

He walked quickly out of the dining area and returned to his office.

       *       *       *       *       *

Slowly, quietly, the work went on. Dr. Petchkovich spent six weeks on
Mercury, supervising at first hand the investigation of the area where
the machine's antennas were focused. He returned to Titan in high
excitement.

"We have definitely proved that there is a disturbance in the
interplanetary magnetic field at the focal point of the machine's
antennas," he announced to the department heads, when they convened in
the conference room to hear his report.

"How strong a disturbance?" Dr. Kulaki asked.

Petchkovich hesitated a moment. "Well, it's only one part in a hundred
thousand...."

The excitement died quickly. It was a discovery, yes. But it did not
bring them any closer to understanding the machine and its purpose.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee was sitting at his desk, staring moodily at a graph that Dr. Childe
had left with him: the results of the Orbital Computing Center's
extrapolation of the wave patterns broadcast by the machine.

The phone buzzer sounded. Without taking his eyes from the graph, Lee
flicked the phone on.

"Are you busy right now?"

He looked up and saw Elaine's face on the screen. "No, not really," he
answered. "Come on in."

"I'll be there in a few minutes."

As soon as she came through the door he knew that something was wrong.
She was trying too hard not to look concerned.

"What's up?" he asked her.

She shrugged and sat down in front of the desk. "I just thought we
might talk for a while."

"In my office?"

"It concerns official business."

"I see."

She looked at the graph. "What's that? Something new?"

_Changing the subject_, he thought to himself. _What's she afraid of?_

Aloud, he answered, "It's Childe's results from the Big Brain ... the
machine's wave patterns extrapolated over a million years." He turned
the graph around so she could see it better.

Elaine studied it for a moment, then shook her head. "Childe was right,
wasn't he? It doesn't make any sense at all. No pattern, no rhyme, no
reason."

"I don't know," Lee said. "There's something ... well, something
strange about these waves. They don't follow a regular pattern, and
yet...."

"What?"

He frowned. "They're just too damned irregular to be really random.
That doesn't make much sense, does it? Well, anyway, I've got the
feeling that I've seen this pattern--or lack of pattern--before.
Somewhere I've seen something that looks a lot like this ... but I
can't remember where."

Elaine looked at the graph again, at the multiple curves swinging back
and forth across the paper, intertwining in seeming confusion. "It
looks like some of the graphs I drew when I was an undergrad."

He laughed. "Maybe that's where I saw it."

There was an awkward silence. Lee got up from his seat and walked
around the desk. He pulled up another chair and sat beside Elaine.
"Now, what's the trouble?"

"I've been thinking," she said slowly. "I ... I've decided to transfer
off Titan."

"Leave? But why?"

"For us, Sid. For both of us. Before we get so wrapped up in each other
that we won't be able to break it up without really getting hurt...."

"I don't understand," he said.

She spoke calmly and softly, no tears, no hysterics. She had thought it
all out very carefully. "Sid, take a look around you. We're like two
castaways on a desert world. We love each other--here and now. But we
won't always be here. What happens when we leave Titan? What happens
when we're not faced with the loneliness and that ... that _thing_ out
there? Suppose we find that we don't really need each other? What then?"

"But I do need you, Elaine. I love you."

"You do now," she answered. "But how long will it last? Sid, I have to
get away, at least for a little while. I need a sense of perspective."

"I see," he said, shifting his gaze away from her. "That doesn't leave
me much to say, does it? All right, Elaine. Make out a transfer request
and I'll sign it."

"Thanks. I ... I hope you understand." She got up and started slowly
toward the door.

"I'm not so sure that you understand this yourself," he replied. "But I
know this--I don't want to lose you, Elaine. If you haven't worked this
out within a month or so after you leave Titan, I'll come looking for
you."

She turned and, without a word, went over and kissed him. Then she
quickly left the office.

Lee returned to his desk. He sat down and stared at Childe's graph
again. After a few minutes, he angrily slapped it in a drawer, slammed
the thing shut, and stamped out of the room.

       *       *       *       *       *

Personal matters were soon buried in the excitement of another
discovery, this time an important one. It looked promising.

Kurtzman and Kulaki finally discovered what form of energy the antennas
were beaming out.

After years of trial-and-error experimentation, the engineer and
electronicist asked Richards and Childe to lend a hand. With a firm
theoretical and mathematical background to bolster their work, Kurtzman
and Kulaki started out on a process of elimination.

They soon proved that the antennas were not broadcasting any known
form of electromagnetic energy, from gamma to long-radio waves. They
investigated one possibility after another, turning up a steady
succession of negative answers. Negative, but answers all the same. It
was time-consuming, but at least they were definitely determining which
avenues were blind alleys.

Then Childe started tinkering with a hunch, and showed his paperwork
to Richards. The two of them made a few suggestions to Kurtzman and
Kulaki. Their problem was that their detection instruments were drawing
blanks, when applied to the antennas' output. But the power input to
the antennas showed they were working continuously.

Childe showed, mathematically, that their output must be an extremely
weak, low-frequency form of energy. Richards agreed, and pointed out
that there was only one known form of energy that fulfilled these
conditions: gravity.

"Gravity waves?" Kurtzman asked, incredulously, when they told him
about it.

Kulaki's mind reacted faster. "Knowing it's gravity waves, on paper,
and proving it experimentally are two different things."

But they were up to the test. They had to scavenge equipment from the
center's grav screen machinery, and the whole underground community
was without its Earth-normal grav field for two and a half days, but
when the field was returned to normal (and people stopped hopping and
bouncing all through the center) Kurtzman and Kulaki had proved that
the antennas were indeed beaming out gravity waves.

_It's all here_, Lee thought, as he read their combined report. _Now
we know what the machine is doing. But to what purpose? What influence
does this have on Earth?_

Then he put down the report and turned to another bit of paperwork that
lay on his desk: Elaine's official request for a transfer. He looked
through it automatically. There was a place marked _Justification for
Request_. Elaine had typed simply, "Personal." Lee flipped to the last
page and signed.

He leaned back in his chair and tried to let his mind float free;
forget about her, forget about the buildings out there, forget about
everything ... at least for a few moments. Just drift and let your mind
wander where it pleases....

       *       *       *       *       *

The automatic secretary on his desk hummed into life and announced,
"Department heads' meeting starts in five minutes."

To hell with the department heads. To hell with Titan. A world of cold
and dark and ice. Like Dante's Inferno. Titan is hell. A place where
sinning scientists are sent. Their punishment is to stand out in the
cold and try to solve the unanswerable. Forever. Stand in the icy
darkness and try to understand the unknown. Once in a while you make
a discovery that excites you; but when you look again, your discovery
is meaningless, you know as little about the real answer as you knew
before. The discoveries are just part of the punishment, part of the
eternal torment, they just keep you going after the carrot on the
stick, but the carrot is always out of reach....

"Department heads' meeting beginning now," the automatic voice said.

Lee cocked an eye at the tiny device. "All right," he said, getting up,
"I'm going."

The meeting was strictly routine. The reaction had set in. A week ago
they had all been agog with the gravity-waves discovery. Now it had
become apparent that the discovery had not opened the door they were
trying to get through. _We're like children_, Lee thought, _trying to
put together a stereo transceiver from an assembly kit; all the pieces
are there, but we can't get them together in the proper way_.

It was a short meeting. As they broke up, Lee saw Richards walk over to
Elaine.

"I hear you're leaving us," the young physicist said. "Going Earthside?"

"Yes," Elaine answered. "For a while, at least."

Richards broke into his feline grin again. "Good. I'll be vacationing
on Earth in a few weeks. Do you like to ski?"

"I haven't skied in years...."

"There's a lodge I go to in Switzerland. Really fine. And the skiing is
marvelous. Even if you don't want to ski, there are mountains to
climb ... and glaciers...."

Lee started toward them, thought better of it, and walked sullenly out
of the room. He went to his office, sat fidgeting at his desk for a
while, then called her on the intercom. She was not at her office or
her quarters, so the equipment automatically paged her. When her face
finally showed on the viewscreen, Lee could see that she was still in
the conference room, which was now empty, except for her and Richards.

"What is it, Sid?"

"Uh ... can you come down to my office for a minute? Right now?"

She quickly covered her surprise. "Of course. I'll be right down."

       *       *       *       *       *

Within a few minutes, she was entering his office. "What's the matter?"

"Nothing," he said, gesturing her to a chair. "I just wanted to get you
out of the grips of that All-American physicist."

"What? Why, you jealous old goat!"

"Never mind. If you want to listen to propositions, please make sure
I'm out of earshot."

She laughed. "Is that what you brought me down here for?"

"Yes."

"I'm flattered."

"Don't be cute."

"He's a very nice boy."

He frowned. "All right, so I'm foolish and juvenile...."

"And he's so interesting," she went on, paying no attention. "He was
telling me all about glaciers. In Switzerland. Near this ski lodge.
Seems the glaciers have been growing during the past few years.
Something I should really be sure to see."

"Sounds fascinating," Lee grumbled.

"Oh, it is. The glaciers, that is. They were retreating, you know,
until a few years ago. Now they're growing again. Goes in cycles, it
seems...."

Lee suddenly stiffened. "Great God of our forefathers!"

"What now?"

Instead of answering, he scrambled out of his chair and went to the
floor-to-ceiling bookcase that lined one wall of the office.

"Sid, what's the matter? Did I say something...."

But he was not listening to her. "That's it," he was muttering, "That
_must_ be it."

Elaine watched him paw through the shelves of books, desperately
searching for something.

"Can I help?" she asked.

"No. I think ..." he snatched at a book and riffled through it. "Yes!
Look at it!"

He wheeled and shoved the open book at her. She nearly dropped it as he
ducked back around his desk and rummaged through a pile of papers.

"Here it is. Look at them!" he shouted, handing her a sheet of paper.
"Put them side by side and look at them."

The book was opened to a graph, Elaine saw, that showed the advance and
retreat of the Ice Age glaciers over the past million years on Earth.
The sheet of paper was Childe's graph of the wave patterns of the
machine's antennas.

Her face went pale as she looked at the two graphs, side by side.
"They ... they're the same ... almost identical."

"It all fits together now," Lee said, drumming his fingers on the
desktop in a restless tattoo. "The machine beams gravity waves into
the interplanetary plasma between the Sun and Mercury. The effect is
infinitesimal, by our short-term standards, but over a hundred thousand
years or so, the cumulative effect must be enough to block off a small
fraction of the Sun's radiation. The Earth goes into a deep freeze for
a few millennia!"

"But why?" Elaine asked. "Why did the Others build it?"

       *       *       *       *       *

Lee paced nervously across the room. "Think a minute. They had beaten
the Earthmen in a bitter interstellar war. They had done their best to
wipe out the human race. What better way to insure their victory than
by subjecting our homeworld to violent climate changes? They probably
thought they were guaranteeing the complete extinction of mankind."

"But the Ice Ages didn't destroy man," Elaine said.

"No. They reduced him to the level of a beast, though. Those few
survivors of the interstellar war were robbed of their civilization.
They had to go back to living in caves, to fighting the other animals
for sheer survival. They made it, though, and re-learned what was lost,
and built a new civilization."

"Then the machine failed its purpose."

"Right," Lee said. "But remember, it's only an automatic machine.
Those who made it, the Others, they're still out there among the stars
somewhere. They're going to be mighty upset when they find out that
we're not dead."

"It's ... terrifying ... in a way."

"The important thing is that we _understand_. Now we can face them,
wherever they are. They're no more intelligent than we are. We've
proved that by learning what the machine is all about. They may be
older, and they certainly know more tricks, but they're not on a
completely higher plain of mental development."

Elaine leaned back in her seat. "Well, it's over. At last it's ended.
We can leave Titan for good now."

"Leave? Not likely. Now we can finally start to tear the machinery
apart and see how it works. We've just been sniffing around it so far,
treating it like a museum exhibit. Now we can shut the damned thing
off and start dissecting it. There's a lot to be done, a whole new
technology to be learned. How does it work? Who are the Others and
where did they come from? There are more questions to answer now than
ever."

"That means that you won't be leaving Titan?" she asked.

"Not for a while. How about you?"

She thought for a moment, then answered, "If you're right about all
this, then there should be a lot of archeological evidence awaiting
discovery on the Moon. Maybe I should organize a team...."

"Then you're leaving anyway," he said.

"For a while, Sid. I'll be back in time."

"Stay off the ski slopes."

She grinned and got up from her chair. Lee kissed her, and she turned
away and went to the door. She looked back to say a final word, but he
was already at his desk, punching buttons on the automatic secretary:

"All right, you mechanical marvel, call the department heads to the
conference room for a meeting in five minutes. And take a message
for the Terran Council Science Committee--Gentlemen: It is my belief
that the question of the alien machinery on Titan is now essentially
solved...."


                                THE END




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TOWERS OF TITAN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


