The Project Gutenberg eBook of Small voice, big man
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Small voice, big man


Author: Stewart Pierce Brown

Illustrator: George Schelling

Release date: December 6, 2023 [eBook #72347]

Language: English

Original publication: New York, NY: Ziff-Davis Publishing Company, 1962

Credits: Greg Weeks, Mary Meehan and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SMALL VOICE, BIG MAN ***




                         small voice, BIG MAN

                        By STEWART PIERCE BROWN

                       Illustrated by SCHELLING

              _No one had heard of Van Richie for years.
              Now his songs whispered ghostly through the
              air, and did their work of love and hate._

           [Transcriber's Note: This etext was produced from
                    Amazing Stories December 1962.
         Extensive research did not uncover any evidence that
         the U.S. copyright on this publication was renewed.]


Car 43 cruised slowly up Eighth Avenue. At the wheel, Patrolman Vince
Ferraro thought mixed thoughts about Patricia Ann Burke. Beside him,
Sergeant Gus Kleiber watched the city in a bored and automatic way,
his mind on Augustus Junior, about to take his bar exams. The radio
crackled in a low key. The evening traffic was light, few people were
on the streets.

The Sergeant turned heavily in his seat. "You hear that?"

"What?"

"A guy singing. Over the radio."

       *       *       *       *       *

Ferraro shook his head. He pulled over and they listened. Routine
police calls squawked from the speaker. Kleiber frowned. "No, this was
singing. It--there!" Faintly behind the official monotone they heard
a man's voice singing. "You know who that sounds like? Van Richie."

"Van Richie? Come on. He's dead."

"Could be a record. Anyway, he ain't dead. He made a movie here a while
back."

"Ten years ago."

"Yeah, but he ain't dead."

"He isn't singing on the radio, either."

Kleiber stared at the radio. The singing had faded out. Ferraro eased
the car back into the stream of traffic and his thoughts back to
Patricia Ann. They were interrupted again as he drove past the Garden.
"I tell you," Kleiber said, "that was _Van Richie_."

Oh, great, Ferraro thought. Now he won't be able to let up on _that_
for a week.

       *       *       *       *       *

"It's cold in here," the girl said. The man at the easel didn't answer.
She hugged herself and tucked her feet under her, frowning petulantly.
"Alex?"

"Put a sweater on," the man said without looking away from his
painting. His voice echoed in the huge loft.

"I've _got_ one on."

"There's a blanket there."

With a sigh, the girl lay back on the bed, pulling the blanket around
her. She draped one arm over her eyes, shielding them from the banks
of fluorescent lights. Under her ear, on the not-very-clean pillow, she
tucked a tiny pocket radio.

In the corner, water dripped from a tap into the chipped basin. Dimly
the sounds of the traffic on Tenth Avenue floated up to them. Almost an
hour passed. When she looked up, the man was standing back, frowning at
the canvas.

"That's enough for now," she said gently.

He dropped the brushes on the taboret and wiped his hands absently, his
eyes on the half-finished painting.

"Alex?"

"Hmm?"

"Keep me warm."

Only then did he look at her. He came and stood over the bed, faintly
smiling. She lifted a corner of the blanket like a tent flap.

They lay watching the lopsided moon inching over the edge of the
streaked and gritty skylight. In the dark, she giggled.

"What's so funny?"

"I just heard Van Richie. Right in the middle of the news."

"Get that thing out of here."

"He just came right in while the man was talking."

"Give it to--"

"Listen." She held the radio to his ear. He listened briefly, then
turned the radio off and put it on the table.

Later, when he got up for a cigarette, he saw it in the light of the
match. "How did you know that was him? You weren't even born then."

But she was asleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

Harry Freed locked up on the dot of nine. He left a night light over
the rear counter, connected the alarm, and walked wearily to the car.

The traffic was lighter tonight. Thank God. He was exhausted. Waiting
for the light at Seventh Avenue, he leaned his head back against the
seat and closed his eyes. It would be nice if Edith had a cup of hot
cocoa ready for him. But tonight was Perry Como. She'd be glued to the
set.

A horn honked behind him. He started, jerked forward and stalled the
car. The light changed back to red before he could get it started
again. People at the crosswalk stared at him. He felt himself blushing.
Edith was right. They should have bought her brother's car last spring
and got rid of this one.

The pavements were still wet, repeating the lights of Times Square in
blurred patches of color. The rain had killed the day's receipts. He
dreaded telling Edith. They said tomorrow would be better. He switched
on the radio to get the news and weather.

The traffic moved slower now. He looked nervously at his watch. Even
with Perry Como, she didn't like it when he was late.

Why hadn't Saul made both deliveries today? Why only one? Reminder: see
Hodges at the bank tomorrow. And write Ruth; ask about his nephew's
broken arm.

Horns again. A cop waving him on. God, he was tired. His eyes. Edith
wanted him to get glasses.

"... clearing, with some cloudiness. Wind from the north ..." Van
Richie singing.

Why are they always digging up Ninth Avenue? Maybe Eleventh would be
better. Crazy taxis. Look at that nut, cutting in and out.

_Van Richie?_

He twisted the dial. "Wheat was off but cotton was higher...." "Our
love came much too soo-oo-oon!" "Next news at 10:30...." "Real,
unfiltered tobacco flavor...."

He had heard him, though. He was sure of it. He told Edith about it
when he got home. She said he was crazy. Van Richie had retired long
ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

The book had pictures of things he knew, with the English names beneath
them. Each word was spelled the way it was pronounced. With the rug
wrapped around him and the book spread on top of the radiator, Gabriel
Sangre said the word aloud, slowly, trying to remember what Miss
Alvirez had said: where the mark was, was louder.

He was hungry. But he did not eat. What was left in the window-sill box
had to last until Friday.

"_Chay_-r." "_Tay_-bel." "_Kow_-ch." He shivered, forcing his knees
between the uprights of the radiator. In bed, he knew, he would be
warmer. But also he would fall asleep. He wanted to finish the lesson.
He did not want to disappoint Miss Alvirez.

Tomorrow would be hard again. A long day, with the stacks of trays and
the heavy dishes and the miles of running around the big kitchen, with
the old Italian barking at him and the waiters pushing him and cursing
him. But he could not go to bed.

He rested his forehead on the book. The heat bathed his face. It felt
good. It made him forget the cold wind outside and the grey and gritty
buildings. It felt like the sun. The island sun that warmed him as he
worked with his father in the fields. Down the long rows side by side,
with the sound of the sea far away and the shrill voices of his sisters
coming faintly across the valley.

The tears came again. He could not stop them. But this time as they
came, he heard music. Singing. A man singing. Faintly, like the sound
of his sisters far away. It was in English. It was not a song he had
ever heard on the Sebastiano's radio. It was not one from the juke box
at El Puerto, uptown. It was a small voice, a gentle voice, and he
liked it. Once or twice he caught a word he knew.

He sat there with his head bowed forward, the rug wrapped around him,
crying for the sun and listening to the singing in his head.

       *       *       *       *       *

The secretary was nice to him. He could tell she had heard of him. Not
_heard_ him. She was too young. But heard _of_ him. Well, small favors.
She called him Mr. Richie, which nobody in Hollywood would have done.

Feldt was nice, too. Up from his chair, hand out. Some of them just sat
there and let you come to them. But he had that same quick, searching
look as they shook hands.

"Sixty-three," Van Richie said.

Feldt smiled but did not quite blush. "I figured it had to be around
that. For what it's worth, you don't look it."

"Thanks." Richie sat down. Feldt returned to his chair behind the desk.

"I talked to Marvin on the coast last night. You're it for us, he says."

"Good. I hope so."

"Yeah, we do, too. It's been a while." Feldt looked at the paper in
front of him. "1941."

"I did some stock out there after the war."

"Yeah. But the last feature was '41. And you were still a, you know...."

"A crooner." Richie smiled with one corner of his mouth.

Feldt smiled, too. "Yeah, a crooner. This one's only got two songs,
y'know."

"I know."

"It's mostly light comedy."

"Marv explained all that."

"Yeah, well...." Feldt carefully squared the paper with the corner of
his blotter. "1941, y'know that's sort of a while ago."

"Yes, it is," Richie said evenly. "Look, Mr. Feldt, if you're trying to
tell me I'll have to read for it, just say so."

"Okay, I just said so."

Richie fitted a cigarette into his holder. His lighter failed and Feldt
held a match for him. "Thanks." He exhaled a cloud of smoke. "Who for?"

"Oh, Abe. Me. Probably the producing team."

"It's always a team today, they just don't have a producer any more, do
they?"

"Just a few of us. Six people, maybe. Seven."

"Just lines?"

"Well, mostly, yeah. We may have a piano there."

The corner of Richie's mouth turned up again. "I _can_ carry a tune,
you know."

Feldt laughed. "Sure, sure. But just to see how it sounds and all."
Richie stared at him, not smiling. Feldt turned off his own laughter.
He shrugged. "What the hell, Van, 1941. We got a bundle in this one.
We're taking no chances. None."

Outside, the secretary's typewriter chattered unevenly. Richie blew a
smoke ring. "Okay," he said, feeling suddenly tired, "Any time you say."

Feldt walked to the elevators with him. "Incidentally, Van, I hate to
ask, but what's with the sauce problem these days?"

Richie shook his head. "Seven years. Eight now, in fact."

"Oh, great. That's great."

"And for your information, it never was what you'd call a problem."

"Well, the papers and all, y'know. We couldn't tell." The elevator
doors hissed open. "Thanks for coming up, fella. See you tomorrow."

Halfway down, the only other man in the car looked up, startled.
"Pardon?"

"I said 'son of a bitch'," Van Richie said. "With feeling."

       *       *       *       *       *

"Good God, you can't even _hear_ him!" one of the men whispered.

Someone else in the darkened theatre called, "Hold it! Can you give it
a little more, Van? We can't hear it out here."

Van Richie squinted toward the seats. "Are the mikes up?"

"All the way. You're going to have to push it."

The piano resumed. Richie's voice was true but small. The whisperer
groaned. "He could use that old megaphone right about now."

When the number was over, Richie came down from the stage and joined
them. "You need help, Van," Feldt said bluntly.

"What about it, Ben?" They all turned to a man sitting alone, several
rows back.

"You don't want a lapel mike?" Ben asked, coming slowly down the aisle.

"Too much cable trailing around. There'll be dancers all over that
stage."

"Lavalier the same thing?"

"The same thing."

"Look, why hide it?" asked the man who'd mentioned the megaphone. "Just
fly a pencil mike. When he's ready, drop it down."

"It breaks the mood," one of the writers said.

"Nuts, the mood. You can't _hear_ him."

"There's one thing we can do...."

"A microphone out of the sky?" the writer groaned.

"Awright, a floor mike, then."

"There is one thing," the electrician began again.

"What's that, Ben?"

"Well, it isn't cheap."

"Of course not," the senior member of the producing team said.

"You mind if you look a little fat, Mr. Richie?"

"Not if they can hear me, Ben. What's the gimmick?"

They listened grimly to the electrician's plan. Feldt glanced at
Richie. He looked old and tired and small. God, Feldt thought, I hope
we haven't pulled a rock.

       *       *       *       *       *

"For your information," Sergeant Kleiber said, "Van Richie hasn't made
a record in 26 years. 1936."

"Fine. Great," Ferraro answered. Inwardly, he groaned. It was _weeks_
now.

"And he sure ain't dead."

"Okay, you looked it up and he's alive." Ferraro moved the car
skillfully through the traffic. "Fine. I'm glad to hear it."

"Looked it up nothing. He just opened in a show right here on 46th!
That's him in person we been hearing. I told you. I know that voice."

"Yeah, you told me."

"Look, why don't you admit you were wrong for once?"

"The hell do you mean? I heard the singing. I said that."

"All you said was he was dead or it was a record or something."

"All I said was I never heard him sing those songs. Where'd you get
all this about he's in a show?"

"Drive by! Turn in 46th! It's right on the sign! Turn in!"

Oh, nuts, thought Ferraro, what do I care if the guy _is_ in a show?

"There. See? Slow down."

"I can see it."

They moved on down the block, past the other theatres. Ferraro
shrugged. "Okay, he's still around."

"Sure is. And that's him we hear singing."

"But at night. How can he be on the radio if he's in a show? They
wouldn't be doing a broadcast from the stage every night."

Typical, thought Kleiber. In the wrong, so now he attacks. He couldn't
say I was wrong or you were right or sorry or anything. "Okay, he's
still around." Big deal. And now boring in about the broadcasting.
Well, the hell with him. They were getting too many of his kind from
the Academy nowadays. The know-it-all, you-heard-it-here-first type. He
was coming up for an advance in pay-grade on the first of the month. He
had big plans to get married. Well, let him stay in the barrel a while
longer. It wouldn't hurt him. Pat or Peg or whatever her name was could
wait. He made a mental note to get Ferraro's fitness report form from
the clerk when they got back to the precinct house.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Can you turn that down a little?"

The girl shrugged and turned the volume control on the tiny radio. A
sudden blare of sound crashed and echoed in the quiet studio. "Sorry,"
she called, hastily twisting the knob the other way.

"Damn it, Nell, you do that every time. You've had that thing a year
now."

"Every time! You always exaggerate when you're mad. The other one was
just the opposite, is all."

He didn't answer. He turned back to the canvas and worked silently for
several minutes. It was not going well but he kept at it doggedly,
frowning in concentration, his lower lip trapped between his teeth.

Suddenly he whirled. "Nell, turn that thing down or get it out of here!"

"It _is_ down! I can't get it any softer."

"Then shut it off."

"Why should I? I want to--"

"I said shut it off!"

"I want to hear if Van Richie comes on with the news again."

"What kind of foolishness--?"

"Ye Gods, can't a person even breathe around here any more? You're so
mad about that lousy painting--"

"Nell." His voice was taut but he didn't shout.

"It _is_. It's lousy and you know it. That's what makes you so--"

"Nell." He started across the room toward her.

"You're not going to take it out on me. It's not my fault if you can't
paint. I don't think--_Alex!_"

She only partially blocked the blow. Holding his wrist, she tried to
bite his arm. He flung her off, sending her reeling against the bed.
"Lousy painting!" she screamed. She threw the radio at the canvas. "It
stinks! It's so bad it makes me sick! It's awful!" Her face was twisted
and flushed and her body jerked with the violence of her shouting.

She tried to run then but he caught her and spun her around. He hit her
with his fist and knocked her down. He stood above her, breathing in
great gulps, his eyes blazing.

She didn't cry. She got to her feet slowly, stumbling once when she
was erect. She walked behind him and he heard the water running in the
basin. He didn't turn around. Her footsteps crossed the room. "That's
the last time, Alex," she said in a small, lifeless voice. He heard the
door close.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a miracle, Gabriel decided. The singing was a miracle. It was to
tell him to go on, to keep studying, to stay in New York and make Miss
Alvirez proud of him. And when he could speak and read English well,
then he would get a better job. A job in an office, maybe, where it was
quiet and people were kind and he could go home at five o'clock. He
would have enough money to go to the movies every night.

And so he worked hard at the words and the sentences, while the
radiator and the singing in his head kept him warm. Every night at the
same time he heard the singing. He understood more and more of the
words.

But it was not the words that helped him through the cold and
loneliness. It was the voice. It seemed to be singing just for him. It
was inside _his_ head. Nobody else heard it. It was like a friend, a
friend he didn't have to share with anyone.

When the tests came, he got the second highest mark in the class. Only
one girl scored better. Miss Alvirez shook his hand and was glad for
him.

Later, he told her about the singing. She looked at him curiously but
she didn't laugh. He even sang the parts he could remember. She did not
know the songs.

It wasn't until he'd been working in the travel office almost six
months that she came by and told him they were from one of the big
plays downtown. She had seen it and had come all the way to his office
to tell him. That made him feel very good.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Listen, if you don't get a clerk in there. You're all jumpy. That's why
you keep hearing that singing."

"Edie, I told you--that's got nothing to do with it," Harry Freed said.

"The man said there was absolutely nothing wrong with the radio. Nobody
else hears any singing. I never get it on the set upstairs."

"I know what I heard, that's all. Four times now."

"You're just getting sicker, that's all that proves."

"Honey, I don't think you should say things like that."

"Yeah? Well, I don't think you should hear voices either. Why don't you
see a doctor? My God, consider somebody else's feelings for a change.
How do you think it would make _me_ feel, having a husband everybody
knew was mentally ill? Around _this_ town? That never occurred to you,
did it? You're too busy thinking of yourself. _I_ try to get you to go
to a doctor. _I_ worry about it until I'm practically sick myself. But,
oh no, you're all right. You just hear voices, that's all. So you don't
care what anybody else is going through. Not you."

Harry sat very still. Then slowly he stood up. "Put your coat on," he
said.

"What do you mean, put--?"

"Just what I said. Put your _coat_ on."

"Oh, Harry, stop. I don't like to be talked to like that and you know
it."

"Edith." He walked across the room until he was standing very close to
her. "Edith, put your coat on and get in the car. We're going into New
York and you're going to hear Van Richie on that radio if I have to tie
you to the seat."

"You're out of your mind. You must be out of your mind! Have you been
drinking or something?"

He stepped closer. Instinctively she stepped back. They stared at each
other. After a moment, she went over to the closet. "Well, if that's
the way you're going to be," she said, taking down her hat and coat. "I
still say it's the silliest thing...."

He found the corners of his mouth were dry. His knees felt watery.
But he drove steadily and surely through the heavy traffic. She kept
repeating how silly it was.

He showed her the theatre with Van Richie's name out front. They drove
back and forth along his homeward route. Three times they heard Van
Richie sing.

On the way back, she began talking again. "Shut up," he said, without
raising his voice, without looking at her. She gasped. But she knew
enough to remain silent.

The critics called it the best musical since _My Fair Lady_. They had
special praise for Van Richie: "He has made the transition from crooner
to comedian with grace and style ... the years have left the familiar
voice intact."

"Bless our boy Ben," Feldt said. He sat on the bed, the newspapers
strewn on the floor at his feet. The cast party crashed and roared in
the next room.

"Van Richie and His Electric Voice," Richie said, dropping the phone
back in the cradle. He'd been trying to call California since midnight.

"Now, listen," Feldt said.

"I know, I know. It's a hit. Sure." Richie was looking out the window.
The senior producer's apartment commanded a view of two-thirds of
Manhattan. The blinking signals of a plane headed for Idlewild. A set
of lights far downtown told him it was 1:57. Seconds later it told him
the temperature was 39 degrees.

"What now?" Feldt asked.

"What?"

"The big sigh."

"Oh, I was just thinking. How it's all different this time."

"We're all thirty years older, dad."

"No. Something else, too. The--what would you call it--the immediacy?"

"You want to call it that, you call it that. Only what the hell are
you talking about?"

"Well, back with the band in the old days, you were right there. _They_
were right there. Swaying there right in front of the stand and you
were singing right to them. I _saw_ kids falling in love right in front
of me. Maybe they got married after that. Maybe they _didn't_ get
married. But I was reaching them, I was communicating."

"When I hear an actor use the word 'communicate', I leave the room."

"This time around I can't get any feeling that I'm reaching anybody,
that it makes any difference."

The party sounds burst in on them. The producer stood in the doorway.
"What, are you memorizing those reviews? Come on, everybody's asking
where you are."

"Here we are."

"Yeah, but come on. They want you, Van. Sibi's at the piano. You're on."

"Sing _Melancholy Baby_," Van Richie said. But, he went out into the
bright, crowded room and over to the piano.

In a corner of the room, Ben listened, smiling and tapping his foot to
the rhythm of the song. The room had quieted down while Van Richie was
singing. There was a crash of applause when he finished.

"Such a _little_ voice," a woman said to Ben. He recognized her as one
of the writers' wives. "What did you do for it, Ben? Arthur said you
did something perfectly amazing."

Ben shrugged. "Not so amazing. We had a little belt made. About--" he
stretched the thumb and middle finger of one hand "--six inches high,
maybe an inch-and-a-half thick. It was a transmitter, actually--a
miniature radio station."

"But I never saw any wires. What did he have, batteries?"

"Transistors. Like the astronauts in the space capsules. He wore the
whole thing under his clothes. We had an amplifier in the wings to pick
up the signal and beam it out to the house speakers." Ben laughed. "It
probably loused up a few radios in the neighborhood but it worked."

"I think it's just incredible. That _little_ voice!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Years later, when the New York dentist replaced Gabriel's old steel
fillings, he explained to him about the music. Gabriel had been
receiving radio signals in the bits of metal in his head, he said. He
was very scientific about it, even drawing a little diagram to show him
how the radiator had helped ground him. Gabriel listened politely and
smiled but said nothing. To him it was still a miracle.


                                THE END




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK SMALL VOICE, BIG MAN ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


