The Project Gutenberg eBook of Pictorial history of the war for the Union, volume 1 (of 2)
    
This ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.

Title: Pictorial history of the war for the Union, volume 1 (of 2)
        A complete and reliable history of the war from its commencement to its close...together with a complete chronological analysis of the war


Author: Ann S. Stephens

Release date: December 6, 2023 [eBook #72340]

Language: English

Original publication: Cincinnati: James R. Hawley, 1862

Credits: Richard Tonsing and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced from images generously made available by The Internet Archive)


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR FOR THE UNION, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***

[Illustration: SEC. OF THE INTERIOR CALEB B. SMITH SECRETARY OF STATE
WILLIAM H. SEWARD SEC. OF THE TREASURY SALMON P. CHASE SECRETARY OF THE
NAVY GIDEON WELLES PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED STATES ABRAHAM LINCOLN
SECRETARY OF WAR EDWIN M. STANTON ATTORNEY GENERAL EDWARD BATES VICE
PRESIDENT HANNIBAL HAMLIN POSTMASTER-GENERAL MONTGOMERY BLAIR]




[Illustration: PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR FOR THE UNION BY Mrs. ANN S.
STEPHENS]




                           PICTORIAL HISTORY

OF THE

WAR FOR THE UNION.

A COMPLETE AND RELIABLE

=History of the War=

FROM ITS

COMMENCEMENT TO ITS CLOSE:

GIVING A GRAPHIC PICTURE OF ITS ENCOUNTERS, THRILLING INCIDENTS,
FRIGHTFUL SCENES, HAIRBREADTH ESCAPES, INDIVIDUAL DARING, DESPERATE
CHARGES, PERSONAL ANECDOTES, ETC., GLEANED FROM EYE-WITNESSES OF, AND
PARTICIPANTS IN, THE TERRIBLE SCENES DESCRIBED—A TRUTHFUL LIVING REFLEX
OF ALL MATTERS OF INTEREST CONNECTED WITH THIS THE MOST GIGANTIC OF
HUMAN STRUGGLES.

TOGETHER WITH A COMPLETE CHRONOLOGICAL ANALYSIS OF THE WAR.


                        BY MRS. ANN S. STEPHENS.

            EMBELLISHED WITH OVER TWO HUNDRED ILLUSTRATIONS.

                              TWO VOLUMES.

                                 VOL I.

                              CINCINNATI:
                   JAMES R. HAWLEY, 164 VINE STREET,
                    PUBLISHER OF SUBSCRIPTION BOOKS.
                                 1863.




         Entered, according to Act of Congress, in the year 1862,

                            BY JOHN G. WELLS,

 In the Clerk’s Office of the District Court of the United States for the
                      Southern District of New York.


  EDWARD O. JENKINS,
    =Printer & Stereotyper,=
  NO. 20 NORTH WILLIAM ST.




                             INTRODUCTION.


The most difficult tusk, perhaps, known to literature, is to write a
history of events as they transpire—to arrange facts before the hand of
time has given them just position and importance. In writing a history
of the Civil War which is now raging in the land—the most gigantic and
stupendous rebellion yet known to the world—the magnitude of the task,
and the difficulties that present themselves, challenge a degree of
moral courage almost equal to that physical bravery which has been so
conspicuous in the war. But if an honest intention to be just—a thorough
desire for truth, and a determination to discard all personal
prejudices, can produce a faithful history, this work has a right to
claim acceptance.

The political history of a nation, when it merges into armed strife, is
generally a record of prejudices and of passion: civil war is the
result. In this work the author deals not with causes, but with the
terrible events that spring out of them; avoiding so far as possible the
threatening clouds of political dissension that preceded and still
follow the tempest. Time, which will clear up obscurities and remove
passion, and the intellect of a great statesman, are necessary, before
the political and military history of this war can be fittingly united.

In this book there is a positive rejection of those partizan dissensions
which have burst asunder the sacred ties of the greatest nation on
earth, and deluged the soil trodden by millions of happy men with the
blood of as brave a soldiery as ever drew breath. This history of the
War for the Union is written for no faction—no party—no combination of
men, but for the people of every portion of the Union. Political
passions die—History lives; and in an enlightened age like this, it must
be written in simple truth, or the clear-sighted generations that follow
us will detect the sophistry and falsehood. Impartial history demands
honest facts. The opinions of an historian are but the assumptions of
one mind attempting to control multitudes. The author’s duty is to give
details, allowing the intelligent reader to draw his own conclusions
unembarrassed by obtrusive opinions, which are in all cases liable to be
influenced by prejudices.

The History of the War for the Union is a record of stupendous events
which have given grandeur to the American arms and sorrow to every good
American heart. Taking up the thread of events where the political
history of the nation left them on the fourth of March, eighteen hundred
and sixty-one, the author has followed the ensanguined track, giving to
every battle-field its place, and every heroic act its record. The
sources of information in which the work has found its existence, have
been authentic reports from the War Department, the official statements
of commandants on the battle-field, and the many thrilling and graphic
descriptions furnished by eye-witnesses.

In giving due credit to those persons who have aided her in the rapid
completion of her first volume, the author acknowledges her great
obligation to WM. OLAND BOURNE, Esq., who has devoted much time to the
work, and whose ample collection of material for history has been freely
used in its preparation; and to J. J. GOLDER, Esq., whose research and
clear judgment in sifting truth from error, arranging facts, and
superintending the work in its progress through the press, has enabled
her to place it before the public in less than three months from its
commencement. To Mr. Golder’s critical care the reader is indebted for
the compact and excellent Chronology attached to this volume, in which
all the historical events of the war are placed in their order of
succession.

In the mechanical and artistic execution of the work, the publisher has
evinced an enthusiasm which corresponds nobly with the great subject of
the history, and has been even lavish in pictorial embellishments. These
have been all drawn and engraved expressly for this work, at great cost;
and in the truthfulness and beauty of their execution, add to the high
reputation already attained by the artists, Messrs. WATERS and SON.

        NEW YORK, _October 1, 1862_.           ANN S. STEPHENS.




                               CONTENTS.


                                                                    PAGE

 Introduction                                                          7

 Inauguration of President Lincoln                                    17

     The coming tempest—The national forbearance—Mustering of rebel
       troops—Efforts for conciliation—The Border States—South
       Carolina—Investment of Fort Sumter—The Star of the West—Gen.
       Beauregard.

 Fortifications in Charleston Harbor                                  25

     The iron floating battery—Cummings Point battery—Castle
       Pinckney.

 Bombardment of Fort Sumter                                           28

     Storming of Fort Sumter, viewed from the land—Naval expedition
       for the relief of Fort Sumter.

 The Nation’s Response                                                40

     Startling effect of the news of the attack on Sumter—The
       President’s Proclamation—Departure of troops for
       Washington—Enthusiasm of the people—Their devotion to the
       national Union—Large contributions to aid the Government.

 Reinforcement of Fort Pickens                                        46

     The harbor of Pensacola—Forts McRae and Barrancas—Description
       of Fort Pickens—Its investment by rebel troops under Gen.
       Bragg—The Federal fleet in the harbor—Successful landing of
       troops and supplies.

 Burning of Harper’s Ferry Arsenal                                    49

 Through Baltimore                                                    50

     Arrival of the Massachusetts Sixth, Col. Jones, in
       Baltimore—Blockade of the streets—Attack by the mob—Defence
       of the military—Terrible results—The regimental band—The
       city authorities—Intense excitement of the
       citizens—Pennsylvania troops—Mayor Brown and Marshal Kane.

 Military Occupation of Annapolis, Md.                                61

     The Eighth Massachusetts and the Seventh New York—Gen.
       Butler—Gov. Hicks—the frigate Constitution—the Naval
       Academy—March to the Junction.

 Maryland                                                             66

     Efforts of secessionists to involve the State in
       rebellion—Patriotic devotion of loyal citizens—Gov.
       Hicks—The State Legislature—Gen. Butler in Maryland—Gen.
       Cadwallader—The _habeas corpus_ act—Chief-Justice Taney.

 Destruction of Gosport Navy Yard                                     73

 The State of the Nation before its Troops entered Virginia           76

     Response of the Governors of Maryland, Delaware, North
       Carolina, Kentucky, and Missouri, to the President’s
       Proclamation—The position of Virginia—The Confederate
       Congress, at Montgomery—Jefferson Davis—The Confederate
       army—Letters of Marque—Postal communication—Tennessee and
       Arkansas—Border States Convention—Position of Missouri.

 Occupation of Alexandria, Va.                                        83

     Assassination of Col. Ellsworth—The Marshall House—J. W.
       Jackson—Brownell Sketch of Ellsworth—Defection of Gen.
       Lee—Lieut. Tompkins’ scout to Fairfax Court House.

 Battle of Great Bethel                                               88

     Death of Major Winthrop and Lieut. Greble.

 The Ambuscade at Vienna, Va.                                         91

 Review at Washington                                                 93

 Advance of the Grand Army                                            94

     Position of the belligerent forces—Gen. McDowell—Gen.
       Patterson—Gen. Johnston—Gen. Beauregard—Advance to Fairfax
       and Centreville—Battle of Blackburn’s Ford.

 The Battle of Bull Run                                               98

     The Federal Commanders and the movements of their forces—The
       engagement—Arrival of rebel reinforcements—The climax and
       the retreat—The battle on the left wing—The battle-field at
       night.

 Western Virginia                                                    129

 Battle of Phillipi, Va.                                             131

 Destruction of Railroad Property                                    133

 Gen. McClellan in Western Virginia                                  133

 Battle of Scareytown                                                134

 Battle of Rich Mountain                                             135

 Battle of Carrick’s Ford                                            137

     Gen. Rosecrans and Col. Lander—Gen. Morris—Capt. Benham—Defeat
       of the rebel forces and death of Gen. Garnett.

 The West                                                            141

 Missouri                                                            143

 Capture of Camp Jackson                                             144

     Decisive action of Capt. Lyon—Gen. Frost—The Missouri
       Legislature—Gov. Jackson—Gen. Harney—Gen. Price—Gen. Lyon
       appointed to command the Department.

 Cairo                                                               150

 Battle of Booneville                                                151

 Battle of Carthage                                                  152

 Battle of Monroe, Mo.                                               154

 Guerrilla Bands in Missouri                                         155

     Gen. Pope in Northern Missouri—State Convention at Jefferson
       City—Gen. Fremont at St. Louis—Invasion of the State by
       Gens. Pillow and Jeff. Thompson—Address of the State
       Convention.

 Battle of Dug Springs                                               156

 Skirmish at Athens, Mo.                                             157

 Battle of Wilson’s Creek                                            159

     Gen. Lyon at Springfield—Gens. Price and McCulloch—Critical
       position of the Federal army—The battle—The death of Gen
       Lyon—Retreat of the Union army.

 Kentucky                                                            164

     The neutrality of the State—Position of Gov. Magoffin—Gen.
       Buckner—Gen. McClellan—The State Legislature—Decisive Union
       measures.

 The Occupation of Paducah                                           168

     Rebel troops ordered to withdraw from Kentucky—Attempt to form
       a revolutionary government in the State—Military movements
       of the rebels in Kentucky—The loyal State government.

 Naval Operations                                                    175

 The Expedition to Cape Hatteras                                     177

 Capture of Forts Hatteras and Clark                                 180

 Western Virginia                                                    182

 Surprise at Cross Lanes                                             183

 Battle of Carnifex Ferry                                            183

 Battle of Cheat Mountain Pass                                       186

 Engagement at Chapmansville                                         188

 Reconnaissance at Green Brier, Western Virginia                     190

 Defence of Lexington, Mo.                                           193

     The Federal forces for the defence of the town—Col. Mulligan
       and the Chicago brigade—Cols. Marshall and Peabody—Advance
       of Gen. Price’s army—The investment—The attack—Bravery of
       the Federal garrison—Their endurance and privations—The
       surrender.

 Attack on Santa Rosa Island, Fla.                                   199

 Battle of Ball’s Bluff, Va.                                         200

     Position of the Federal forces on the Potomac—Gen. Stone—Col.
       Baker—The proposed reconnoissance—Transportation of the
       troops—The topography of the Virginia shore—The
       engagement—Death of Col. Baker—Defeat of the Federal
       troops—Disastrous retreat—Gens. McClellan and Banks at
       Edwards Ferry—Sketch of Col. Baker.

 Battle at Camp Wild Cat, Ky.                                        210

 Battle of Romney, Va.                                               212

 Battle of Frederickton, Mo.                                         213

 Charge of Fremont’s Body-Guard at Springfield, Mo.                  217

 The Department of Missouri                                          220

     General review of the Department—Gen. Lyon—Gen. Fremont—His
       proclamation and its modification by the
       President—Organization of the Federal forces—Their
       advance—Negotiations with Gen. Price—Gen. Fremont
       removed—Appointment of Gen. Hunter—Retreat of the Federal
       army—The disloyal Legislature—Advance of the rebel
       forces—Recruiting—Gen. Halleck.

 The Stone Fleet                                                     225

 Battle of Camp Alleghany, Western Virginia                          228

 Battle of Munfordsville, Ky.                                        230

 Capture of Rebel Recruits at Milford, Mo.                           232

 Battle of Dranesville, Va.                                          238

 Expedition to Ship Island                                           241

 Engagement at Mount Zion, Mo.                                       242

 Arkansas and the Indians                                            243

 Bombardment at Fort Pickens                                         245

 Rout of Gen. Marshall at Paintsville, Ky.                           247

 Battle of Middle Creek, Ky.                                         248

 Battle of Silver Creek, Mo.                                         251

 Battle of Mill Spring, Ky.                                          255

 Investment of Fort Pulaski, Ga.                                     262

 New Mexico and Arizona                                              266

 Battle of Valvende, N. M.                                           267

 Battle of Apache Cañon                                              270

 Fight at Blooming Gap, Va.                                          273

 East Tennessee under Confederate rule                               275

     The loyalty and devotion of the people—Despotism of the rebel
       leaders—Parson Brownlow—Sufferings of the Unionists—General
       Zollicoffer—Andrew Johnson—Horace Maynard—Bridge-burning.

 Capture of Fort Henry, Tenn.                                        281

     Gen. Grant’s army—Gen. C. F. Smith—Com. Foote and the naval
       flotilla—Sailing of the expedition—Names of the vessels and
       officers—The attack and surrender—The rebel camp—Advance of
       the national gunboats up the Tennessee river.

 The Burnside Expedition                                             290

     Sailing of the expedition from Hampton Roads—Com.
       Goldsborough—The naval forces—Gen. Burnside and the
       troops—Severe storm—The fleet at Hatteras Inlet.

 Capture of Roanoke Island                                           292

 Evacuation of Bowling Green, Ky.                                    296

 Capture of Fort Donelson                                            298

     Advance of the Federal land and naval forces from Fort Henry
       and Cairo—Description of Fort Donelson—The naval
       attack—Retreat of the gunboats—The army—The land attack—The
       severity of the engagement—Sufferings of the Federal
       soldiers—Their courage and endurance—Protracted defence—The
       surrender.

 The Occupation of Nashville                                         317

 Fort Clinch and Fernandina, Fla.                                    321

 The Merrimac and the Monitor                                        322

 Capture of Jacksonville, Fla.                                       330

 Occupation of Columbus, Ky.                                         332

 Battle of Pea Ridge, Ark.                                           334

 Battle of Newbern, N. C.                                            342

 Capture of New Madrid, Mo.                                          351

 Island No. 10                                                       356

 Capture of Island No. 10 and the Rebel army                         358

 Battle of Winchester, Va.                                           362

     Position of Gen. Shield’s command—The rebel force under Gen.
       Jackson—Plans of the Confederate leaders—Strategy of Gen.
       Shields—Attack by Gen. Jackson—The rebels reinforced—Bravery
       of the Federal troops—Charge of Gen. Tyler’s brigade—Defeat
       of the rebels.

 Battle of Pittsburg Landing                                         367

     Topography of the country—Corinth—Pittsburg—Savannah—Position
       of the Federal troops—The rebel army and its commanders—The
       battle of Sunday, March 8—Hurlbut’s division—McClernand’s
       division—Desperate hand-to-hand fighting—Perilous position
       of the national troops—Wallace’s division.

 Gen. Sherman’s Reconnoissance toward Corinth                        403

 Occupation of Huntsville, Ala.                                      404

 Capture of Fort Pulaski, Ga.                                        408

 Battle of South Mills, N. C.                                        414

 Capture of Fort Macon                                               418

 Siege of Yorktown, Va.                                              424

     Retreat of the rebel army from Centreville and Manassas,
       toward Richmond—Advance of Gen. McClellan’s army—Events of
       March, 1862—The Federal army at Old Point—Advance toward
       Yorktown—The Investment—Offensive and defensive
       operations—Labors and sufferings of the Federal soldiers.

 Battle of Lee’s Mills, Va.                                          427

 Capture of New Orleans                                              429

     Bombardment of Forts Jackson and St. Philip—The Federal
       fleet—The mortar boats—Coms. Farragut, Porter, and
       Bailey—Stupendous naval engagement—The surrender of the
       forts—The occupation of New Orleans—Capt. Bailey—Gen.
       Lovell—J. T. Monroe—Pierre Soulé—Gen. Butler.

 The Evacuation of Yorktown                                          448

 The Battle of Williamsburg, Va.                                     450

     Advance of Gen. Stoneman’s cavalry from Yorktown—Gen. Hooker’s
       division—Gen. Kearney—Gen. Sumner—Gens. Smith and Couch—Gen.
       Hooker’s attack and protracted contest with superior
       numbers—Gen. Heintzelman—Gen. Hancock’s brilliant
       charge—Arrival of Gen. McClellan—Retreat of the rebels.

 Battle of West Point, Va.                                           462

 Chronology                                                          465




                        INDEX TO ILLUSTRATIONS.


                                                                 PAGE
   PRESIDENT LINCOLN AND HIS CABINET                                2
   ILLUSTRATED TITLE                                                3
   INITIAL LETTER, WITH BATTLE ILLUSTRATIONS                        7
   THE CAPITOL, AT WASHINGTON                                      17
   FORT SUMTER                                                     21
   BOMBARDMENT OF FORT SUMTER                                      29
   ATTACK ON THE MASSACHUSETTS SIXTH IN BALTIMORE                  53
   ASSASSINATION OF COL. ELLSWORTH                                 86
   MAP OF VIRGINIA AND MARYLAND, WEST OF WASHINGTON                96
   „        „           „       EAST       „                       97
   BRILLIANT CHARGE ON A REBEL BATTERY AT BULL RUN                108
   CLOSING ENGAGEMENT AT BULL RUN                                 115
   BATTLE OF RICH MOUNTAIN                                        136
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 5                        148
   „    „      „           „      „     6                         149
   DEATH OF GEN. LYON                                             162
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 2                        166
   „    „      „           „      „     3                         167
   MAP OF ATLANTIC COAST FROM FORTRESS MONROE TO FORT MACON       178
   THE BATTLE OF LEXINGTON, MO.                                   191
   THE DEATH OF COL. BAKER, AT BALL’S BLUFF                       206
   DESPERATE CHARGE OF FREMONT’S BODY-GUARD, AT SPRINGFIELD, MO.  219
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 1                        221
   BATTLE OF MILL SPRING                                          260
   BOMBARDMENT OF FORT HENRY                                      279
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 4                        289
   ATTACK ON FORT DONELSON, BY THE GUNBOATS                       299
   SURRENDER OF FORT DONELSON                                     299
   MAP OF THE CUMBERLAND AND TENNESSEE RIVERS, &C.                305
   BIRDS’-EYE VIEW OF HAMPTON ROADS, VA.                          323
   CAVALRY CHARGE AT THE BATTLE OF PEA RIDGE                      339
   BATTLE OF NEWBERN, N. C.                                       343
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 7                        352
   „    „       „          „      „     8                         353
   BOMBARDMENT OF ISLAND NO. 10                                   359
   BAYONET CHARGE AT THE BATTLE OF WINCHESTER                     365
   DEFENCE OF A FEDERAL BATTERY AT PITTSBURG LANDING              377
   BATTLE OF PITTSBURG LANDING                                    387
   MAP OF VIRGINIA, SOUTHERN SECTION                              422
   „      „         „        „                                    423
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 21                       430
   BOMBARDMENT OF FORTS JACKSON AND ST. PHILIP                    439
   MAP OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER, SECTION 20                       446
   BIRDS’-EYE VIEW OF THE COUNTRY FROM RICHMOND TO YORKTOWN, VA.  451
   BATTLE OF WILLIAMSBURG, VA.                                    455
   REBEL CAVALRY CHARGE AT THE BATTLE OF WILLIAMSBURG, VA.        460


                               PORTRAITS.

   ANDERSON, ROBERT, BRIG.-GEN.                                   253
   BANKS, NATHANIEL P., MAJ.-GEN.                                 405
   BATES, EDWARD, ATTORNEY-GEN.                                     2
   BLAIR, MONTGOMERY, POSTMASTER-GEN.                               2
   BURNSIDE, AMBROSE E., MAJ.-GEN.                                 67
   BUTTERFIELD, DAN., MAJ.-GEN.                                    15
   BUTLER, BENJ. F., MAJ.-GEN.                                     67
   BUELL, DON CARLOS, MAJ.-GEN.                                   215
   CASEY, SILAS, BRIG.-GEN.                                        15
   COUCH, DARIUS N., MAJ.-GEN.                                     15
   CORCORAN, MICHAEL, BRIG.-GEN.                                  253
   CHASE, SALMON P., SEC. OF TREASURY                               2
   CLAY, CASSIUS M., MAJ.-GEN.                                    315
   DIX, JOHN A., MAJ.-GEN.                                        405
   DOUBLEDAY, ABNER, BRIG.-GEN.                                   253
   DURYEA, ABEAM, BRIG.-GEN.                                      253
   DUPONT, S. F., REAR-ADMIRAL                                    271
   ELLSWORTH, ELMER E., COL.                                      315
   FARRAGUT, D. G., REAR-ADMIRAL                                  173
   FOOTE, D. G., REAR-ADMIRAL                                     173
   FREMONT, JOHN C., MAJ.-GEN.                                    315
   FRANKLIN, WM. B., MAJ.-GEN.                                    271
   GOLDSBOROUGH, L. M., REAR-ADMIRAL                              173
   GRANT, ULYSSES S., MAJ.-GEN.                                   215
   HALLECK, HENRY W., MAJ.-GEN.                                   233
   HANCOCK, WINFIELD S., BRIG.-GEN.                                15
   HAMLIN, HANNIBAL, V. PRES. OF U. S.                              2
   HOOKER, JOSEPH, MAJ.-GEN.                                      253
   HEINTZELMAN, SAML. P., MAJ.-GEN.                                67
   HUNTER, DAVID, MAJ.-GEN.                                       315
   KENLY, J. R., BRIG.-GEN.                                       315
   KELLEY, BRIG.-GEN.                                              15
   KEARNEY, PHILIP, MAJ.-GEN.                                     253
   LANDER, FRED. W., BRIG.-GEN.                                   253
   LYON, NATHANIEL, BRIG.-GEN.                                    315
   LINCOLN, ABRAHAM, PRES. U. S.                                    2
   MANSFIELD, J. K. F., BRIG.-GEN.                                 15
   MCCOOK, ALEX. MCD., BRIG.-GEN.                                 315
   MCCLELLAN, GEO. B., MAJ.-GEN.                                  197
   MCDOWELL, IRWIN, MAJ.-GEN.                                     405
   MCCALL, GEO. A., MAJ.-GEN.                                      67
   MCCLERNAND, JOHN A., MAJ.-GEN.                                 271
   POPE, JOHN, MAJ.-GEN.                                          215
   PORTER, D. D., REAR-ADMIRAL                                    173
   RENO, JESSE L., MAJ.-GEN.                                      271
   ROSECRANS, W. S., BRIG.-GEN.                                    15
   RICHARDSON, ISRAEL B., BRIG.-GEN.                               15
   SICKLES, DANIEL E., MAJ.-GEN.                                  405
   SEDGWICK, MAJ.-GEN.                                            315
   SPRAGUE, WM., GOV. OF R. I.                                    253
   STRINGHAM, S. H., REAR-ADMIRAL                                 173
   STEVENS, ISAAC I., BRIG.-GEN.                                   15
   SCHURTZ, CARL, BRIG.-GEN.                                       15
   SHIELDS, JAMES, BRIG.-GEN.                                     405
   SMITH, CALEB B., SEC. OF THE INTERIOR                            2
   SEWARD, WM. H., SEC. OF STATE                                    2
   STANTON, EDWIN M., SEC. OF WAR                                   2
   SIGEL, FRANZ, MAJ.-GEN.                                        215
   SCOTT, WINFIELD, LIEUT.-GEN.                                   127
   VIELE, E. L., BRIG.-GEN.                                       253
   WALLACE, LEWIS, MAJ.-GEN.                                      215
   WOOL, JOHN E., MAJ.-GEN.                                        67
   WELLES, GIDEON, SEC. OF NAVY                                     2
   WINTHROP, THEODORE, MAJ.                                       253
   WILKES, CHARLES, COM.                                          271
   WEBER, MAX, BRIG.-GEN.                                         313
   WADSWORTH, JAMES S., BRIG.-GEN.                                315

[Illustration: UNION HEROES]




[Illustration: [Capitol]]

                           WAR FOR THE UNION.


On the 4th of March, 1861, when Abraham Lincoln took the inaugural oath
in front of the National Capitol, his footprints upon the marble marked
the great and terrible epoch in the history of our government. The scene
was imbued with a grandeur undiscovered and without acknowledgment from
the thousands and thousands of freemen who crowded and surged like an
ocean at his feet.

An old man, bowed both by responsibility and years, stood by his side,
then and there to render up his august position over a great country, at
the very moment struggling with the first throes of civil war. How weary
he had become, and how gladly he laid down the burden of his power, no
heart save his own can tell. But the darkness and the thunders of coming
strife followed alike James Buchanan in his retirement and Abraham
Lincoln into the thorny splendors of the White House. Solemn and very
sad were these two men as they stood for a brief space before the
people. The splendor of power brought no happiness either in the giving
or receiving. No two men upon the face of the earth ever stood before a
people in an attitude so imposing, so fraught with terrible events. When
they shook hands peace veiled her face, and, shuddering, shrunk away
into the shadows which have darkened around her closer and thicker, till
she is now buried so deep beneath the gathered death-palls that no one
can tell where she is hidden. For months and even years she had been
threatened by factions, disturbed by reckless speech and still more
reckless pens, but now, behind all these, warcries swelled, and bayonets
glistened in the distance, bloodless as yet, but threatening storms of
crimson rain.

There, upon the verge of this coming tempest, the two Presidents parted,
one for the solitude of a peaceful home, the other outward bound into
the wild turmoil of contesting thoughts and heroic deeds. As I have
said, no one fully realized the coming terror, or thought how easy a
thing it is for a war of passions to verge into a war of blood. Still
the signs of the last three months had been painfully ominous. The
strife of opinions and clash of factions, which had been waxing deeper
and stronger between the North and the South, concentrated after
Lincoln’s election, and the heart of the nation was almost rent in twain
before he took the inaugural oath. When he stood up, the central figure
of the imposing picture presented to the nation on the fourth of March,
a southern government had already been organized at Montgomery, and
Jefferson Davis had been sworn in as its president, while the men who
had abandoned their seats in the United States Senate now held place in
the Confederate Cabinet.

Between the time of President Lincoln’s election and his inauguration,
five States had followed the lead of South Carolina and declared
themselves out of the Union. One by one the representatives of these
States had left Congress, some in sullen silence, others eloquent with
passion and sophistry.

The nation saw all this, but would not comprehend the imminence of its
danger. At a New England dinner, given in New York, December 22d, 1860,
one of the most astute statesmen of the country had prophesied, in words
that amounted to a promise, that sixty days would be sufficient time in
which to tranquilize all this turbulent discontent, and the people
believed him; but the sixty days had long since passed, and instead of
peace a Confederate government had planted itself on the Alabama river;
secession flags floated over more than one of our forts, and another
fort in Charleston harbor had only been preserved by the forethought and
bravery of Major Anderson, who was then engirdled by hostile batteries,
and half-starving from lack of supplies. In the North also the spirit of
sedition was abroad. Southern travellers still lingered in our great
cities, and conspiracies grew up like nightshade in the
dark—conspiracies that threatened not only the government, but the very
life of its elected President.

Even on his way to the Capitol Lincoln had been called from his bed at
Harrisburg and hurried forward to Washington in the night, thus, without
a shadow of doubt, escaping the assassination that awaited him in
Baltimore. Still so blind were the people, and so resolute to believe
that nothing serious could result from a rebellion that had been
preceded by so much bravado, that even the President’s preservation from
the death prepared for him was taken up by the press and echoed by the
people as a clever joke, calculated to bring out a Scotch cap and long
cloak in strong relief, but of doubtful origin. Yet the absolute danger
in this case might have been demonstrated to a certainty had any one
possessing authority cared to investigate the facts. But the nation had
not yet recovered from the excitement of a popular election, and
everything was submerged in the wild rush of politicians that always
follows close on an inauguration.

In this whirlpool of political turmoil rebellion had time to grow and
thrive in its southern strongholds, for its imminence could not be
forced upon the cool consideration of a people whose traditions had so
long been those of prosperous peace. The idea of a civil war, in which
thousands on thousands of brave Americans would redden the soil but just
denuded of its primeval timber, was an idea so horrible that the most
iron-hearted man failed to recognize it as a possibility. That the
revolt of these Southern States would in less than a year fill the whole
length and breadth of the land with widows and orphans—that American
brothers could ever be brought to stand face to face in mortal strife as
they have done—that women, so lately looked on with love and reverence,
should grow coarse and fiendish from a scent of kindred blood, mocking
at the dead and sending victims into a death-snare by their smiles,
alas! alas! who could have foreseen it? The very angels of Heaven must
have turned away from the suggestion in unbelief.

Never on the face of the earth has a war so terrible been waged on so
little cause. The French Revolution—whose atrocities we have not yet
emulated, thank God—was the frenzied outbreak of a nation trodden under
foot and writhing in the grasp of tyranny such as no American ever
dreamed of. If the people became fiends in their revenge, it was the
outgrowth of fearful wrongs. But where is the man North or South in our
land who had been subject to tyranny or aggression from its government
when this war commenced?

No wonder the government looked upon the rebellion with forbearance. No
wonder it waited for the sober second thought which it was hoped would
bring its leaders back to the old flag, under which the contending
parties might reason together. But no, the first step, which ever counts
most fatally, was taken, and every footprint that followed it is now red
with American blood.

A month passed. President Lincoln was in the White House, besieged by
office-seekers almost as closely as Major Anderson was surrounded in
Fort Sumter. Ambassadors, consuls, postmasters, collectors, and all the
host of placemen that belong to the machinery of a great nation, made
their camping ground in Washington, and their point of attack the White
House. But amid all this excitement, great national events would force
themselves into consideration. News that Jefferson Davis was mustering
troops, and that rebellion was making steady strides in the disaffected
States, broke through the turmoil of political struggles.

But the state of the country gave painful apprehension to men who stood
aloof from the struggles for place going on at Washington, and those who
had time for thought saw that the rebellion was making steady
progression. The Border States—Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and
Missouri—with the non-slaveholding States verging upon them, had made a
desperate effort to unite on some plan of pacification, but in vain. The
border slave States, being in close neighborhood with the North,
hesitated in joining the cotton States already in revolt. But
disaffection was strong even there, and no great mind, either in
Congress or out of it, had arisen strong enough to check the spirit of
revolution. Before Lincoln’s inauguration Governor Letcher had declared
that any attempt of the United States government to march troops across
the State of Virginia, for the purpose of enforcing the Federal
authority anywhere, would be considered “an invasion, which must be
repelled by force.” Never was the government placed in a more
humiliating position. President Buchanan was surrounded by advisers,
many of whom were secretly implicated in the rebellion, and felt himself
powerless to act in this emergency, while leading officers of the
Federal government were daily making use of their high powers to
consummate the designs of the conspirators.

Immediately after the act of secession of South Carolina, Governor
Pickens had commenced the organization of an army. Commissioners had
appeared in Washington to demand the surrender of the fortifications in
Charleston harbor, and the recognition of the State as a distinct
nationality. Castle Pinckney, Forts Moultrie and Sumter were the
government fortifications in the harbor. Fort Moultrie was garrisoned by
a small force, which had been reduced far below the ordinary peace
complement, under the command of Major Anderson, a noble and brave man.
On the night of December 26, in order to place his command in a more
secure fortification, Major Anderson had removed his men and material to
Fort Sumter, where, from its isolated position, he had nothing to fear,
for a time at least, from the armed masses that were gathering about
him. This movement, peaceable in itself, placed his little band in a
position where it could inflict no injury on the inhabitants of
Charleston. The city was thus placed beyond the range of his guns. But
the movement was received with outbursts of indignation from the people
of South Carolina.

The then Secretary of War, John B. Floyd, of Virginia, had promised the
South Carolina seceders that everything in the harbor of Charleston
should be left undisturbed. But of this promise both President Buchanan
and Major Anderson were ignorant. In making a movement of signal
importance, that resulted in a terrible inauguration of war, the Major
had exercised an undoubted right, conferred by his position as an
independent commander.

President Buchanan, when called upon to interfere, repudiated the pledge
made by his Secretary, and peremptorily refused to sanction it in any
way.

[Illustration:

  FORT SUMTER.
]

This threw the people of Charleston into a fever of indignation. The
Charleston _Courier_ denounced Major Anderson in the most cutting terms.
“He has achieved,” said that journal, “the unenviable distinction of
opening civil war between American citizens, by a gross breach of faith.
He has, under counsel of a panic, deserted his post at Fort Moultrie,
and by false pretexts has transferred his garrison and military stores
to Fort Sumter.” The _Mercury_, still more imperative, insisted, “that
it was due to South Carolina and good faith, that Major Anderson’s act
should be repudiated by his government, and himself removed forthwith
from Fort Sumter.”

Meantime Castle Pinckney and Fort Moultrie were occupied and garrisoned
by the troops of South Carolina. The small guard left in charge of these
posts by Major Anderson were disarmed and kept by force from joining
their commander.

That day the Palmetto flag was hoisted over the Custom House and Post
Office of Charleston. That day, also, Captain L. N. Costa, commander of
the revenue cutter William Aiken, betrayed his government and delivered
his vessel over to the State authorities, carrying with him a majority
of his men.

These proceedings at Fort Sumter resulted in the withdrawal of John B.
Floyd, of Virginia, from Mr. Buchanan’s counsellors, and ultimately in
breaking up his cabinet only a few weeks before his term of office
expired; for there, as elsewhere, arose a conflict of opinion, northern
members taking one side and Southern members another. Howell Cobb, of
Georgia, Secretary of the Treasury, and Jacob Thompson, of the Interior,
soon followed Floyd, and after them went General Cass, of Michigan.
Their places were supplied for the brief time of Buchanan’s term by
Holt, of Kentucky, Stanton, of Pennsylvania, Dix, of New York, and
Horatio King, who had been a leading mind in the Post Office Department
for twenty years.

The military authorities of South Carolina, strengthened by volunteers
and contributions from other States, commenced the siege of Fort Sumter
in earnest. They planted heavy batteries on James Island, Morris Island,
and Cummings Point. In every spot where guns could be brought to bear on
the fort, powerful earthworks were erected, and an immense floating
battery of unexampled construction was planned. This, anchored within
short range when the day of attack should arrive, was expected to work
terrible execution.

Thus encircled by bristling guns at every point, forbidden all
intercourse beyond the walls, and denied the privilege of procuring
fresh provisions almost entirely, Major Anderson and his noble band
could only wait for the help which was slow in coming.

Thus day by day the isolated fort stood like a solitary rock, against
which the angry surges of an ocean were stormfully mustering. Girdled in
by an army that grew stronger every moment, its noble commander and his
scarcely less heroic men, stood firmly by the flag that floated above
its battlements, the only stars and stripes now visible from horizon to
horizon.

The God of heaven, and that small handful of men, only know the
anxieties that beset them. With no means of intelligence, no certainty
of support, if an emergency arose demanding an assumption of prompt
responsibility, with nothing but gloom landward or seaward, Anderson and
his little forces stood at bay. Every hour, every moment, restricted
their privileges and consumed their stores; they began to look forward
to a lack of food, and many an anxious eye was turned toward the ocean,
in a wistful search after the succor that did not come.

The government in Washington was painfully aware of the peril which hung
over these brave men. Still, some hope of an amicable adjustment
lingered, and President Buchanan hesitated in taking measures that might
inaugurate a civil war. But his obligations to these suffering men were
imperative. The heroic band, so faithful to their trust, so true to
their national honor, must not be left to starve or fall for lack of
food and re-enforcements.

On the 5th of January the Star of the West set sail from New York, laden
with stores, ammunition, and two hundred and fifty men. Fort Sumter was
at length to be relieved. But the North abounded with secession
sympathizers, and in a few hours after the steamer sailed, the people of
Charleston were informed of her destination by telegraph. Preparations
were promptly made for her reception. Captain McGowan had intended to
enter Charleston harbor at night, hoping to veil himself in darkness,
and reach Fort Sumter undiscovered. But the buoys, sights and ranges had
been removed, and, thus baffled, he was compelled to lie outside the
harbor till daylight.

At half-past 7, A. M., January 9th, the Star of the West started for the
fort. A shot from Morris Island cut sharply across her bows. She run up
the stars and stripes, sending that first aggressive shot a noble
answer, in red, white and blue, but keeping steadily on her course.

Again and again the audacious guns on Morris Island ploughed up the
waters in her path, and, thus assailed, she slowly changed her course,
and left the besieged fort without succor.

The little garrison in Fort Sumter watched these proceedings with keen
anxiety; though ignorant of the nature and errand of the steamer, this
attack aroused the patriotism in every heart. They saw the stars and
stripes deliberately fired upon. Seventeen guns sent their iron messages
from Morris Island, and then, ignorant of the cause, ignorant of
everything, save that the old flag had been assaulted, the garrison fell
to work. The guns of Fort Sumter were run out ready for action, but just
then the steamer veered on her course and moved seaward.

Had Major Anderson known that the Star of the West was struggling to
give him succor, those seventeen shots would never have been fired with
impunity.

While the steamer was yet hovering on the horizon, Anderson sent a flag
to Governor Pickens, inquiring if a United States steamer had been fired
upon by his authority. Governor Pickens replied that it was by his
authority. Immediately on the receipt of this answer, Lieutenant Talbot
left Fort Sumter with despatches for Washington, asking for
instructions.

From that time the garrison remained in a state of siege, until the 5th
of April, one month after the inauguration of Abraham Lincoln as
President of the United States.

At this time the fort had become more closely besieged. The little
garrison was refused fresh provisions from the city, and its supplies by
the Government were almost consumed. Starvation or surrender lay before
Major Anderson and his handful of men.

Though cut off from communication with the fort, the Government was not
unmindful of its needs. From the 5th to the 11th of April three vessels
of war, three transports, and three steamers sailed from New York and
Norfolk, with men, horses, and munitions of war. The destination of
these vessels was kept secret, and public curiosity became intensely
excited. The Confederate Government, now assembled at Montgomery,
Alabama, was promptly notified, by its secret emissaries, of these
movements. Indeed, it is doubtful if Jefferson Davis was not better
informed, regarding the destination of this expedition, than the people
of the North. The result was, a formal demand on Major Anderson for the
surrender of Fort Sumter by General Beauregard, commander of the
Confederate forces investing the fort, which now numbered 7,000 men,
protected by batteries mounting 140 siege guns.

President Lincoln had notified Governor Pickens that provisions would be
sent to the garrison of Fort Sumter, peaceably, if possible, if
necessary, by force.

General Beauregard, commander of the Confederate forces, knew of the
succor at hand, but deeming Anderson ignorant of its coming, hoped that
the state of semi-starvation to which the garrison was reduced, might
enforce the surrender before help arrived. But the astute rebel found
himself matched by a soldier, cautious in negotiation as he afterwards
proved himself heroic in battle.

On Thursday, the 11th of April, a boat was seen approaching the work,
with Colonel Chesnut, Colonel Chisholm and Captain Lee, aids to General
Beauregard. They handed Major Anderson a communication from General
Beauregard, which was a summons to evacuate the fort. It was to this
effect: that the Confederate authorities had refrained from any hostile
act against Fort Sumter in anticipation that the government of the
United States would withdraw its troops from that fort; that it appeared
probable at one time that this would have been done, but that the
authorities of the Confederate States could no longer refrain from
taking possession of a fort that commanded the entrance to one of their
principal harbors, and that the order to evacuate the fort was now made
upon the following terms: The troops to be allowed to carry with them
their arms, all personal baggage and company property of every
description, and the flag which had been maintained with so much
fortitude, might be saluted when hauled down.

Major Anderson replied, that his word of honor, and the duty he owed to
his government, forbade his compliance with the demand.

These gentlemen then left the fort, displaying a _red_ flag.

At half-past 1 A. M., on Friday, a boat containing Colonel Chesnut,
Captain Lee and Colonel Roger A. Pryor, approached the work with a
communication from General Beauregard, making inquiry as to what day
Major Anderson would evacuate the work, and asking if he would agree not
to open his batteries unless Fort Sumter was fired upon. Suspecting from
the urgency of this midnight negotiation, some strong necessity on the
part of his opponent, but convinced that an evacuation would be
inevitable, Major Anderson made a written reply, stating that he would
evacuate the fort at noon, on the 15th, provided he did not receive
supplies or controlling instructions from his government to the
contrary. That he would not open his batteries unless the flag of his
country was fired upon, or unless some hostile intention on the part of
the Confederate forces should be manifested.

Being in hourly expectation of the arrival of a United States fleet with
reinforcements off the harbor, and urged to instant action by dispatches
from Montgomery, General Beauregard had prepared his messengers for this
answer. Anderson’s communication was handed to Colonel Chesnut shortly
after 3 o’clock, who, after a short consultation with the officers who
had accompanied him, handed a communication to Major Anderson, and said,

“General Beauregard will open his batteries in one hour from this time,
sir.”

Major Anderson looked at his watch, and said,

“It is half-past three. I understand you, sir, then, that your batteries
will open in an hour from this time?”

Colonel Chesnut replied, “Yes, sir, in one hour.”

They then retired.




                  FORTIFICATIONS IN CHARLESTON HARBOR.


Fort Sumter is a pentagonal structure, built upon an artificial island
at the mouth of Charleston harbor, three and three-eighths miles from
the city of Charleston. The island has for its base a sand and mud bank,
with a superstructure of the refuse chips from several northern granite
quarries. These rocks are firmly embedded in the sand, and upon them the
present fortification is reared. The island itself cost half a million
dollars, and was ten years in construction. The fortification cost
another half million dollars, and at the time of its occupancy by Major
Anderson, was so nearly completed as to admit the introduction of its
armament. The walls are of solid brick and concrete masonry, built close
to the edge of the water, and without a berme. They are sixty feet high,
and from eight to twelve feet in thickness, and are pierced for three
tiers of guns on the north, east and west exterior sides. Its weakest
point is on the south side, of which the masonry is not only weaker than
that of the other sides, but it is unprotected from a flank fire. The
wharf and entrance to the fort are on this side.

The work is designed for an armament of one hundred and forty pieces of
ordnance of all calibres. Two tiers of the guns are under bomb-proof
casements, and the third or upper tier is open, or, in military
parlance, _en barbette_; the lower tier for forty-two pounder paixhan
guns; the second tier for eight and ten-inch columbiads, for throwing
solid or hollow shot; and the upper tier for mortars and twenty-four
pound guns. The full armament of the fort, however, had not arrived when
Major Anderson took possession; but after its occupancy by him, no
efforts had been spared to place the work in an efficient state of
defence, by mounting all the available guns and placing them at salient
points. Only seventy-five of the guns were in position at the time of
the attack. Eleven paixhan guns were among that number, nine of them
commanding Fort Moultrie, which is within easy range, and the other two
pointing towards Castle Pinckney, which is well out of range. Some of
the columbiads, the most effective weapon for siege or defensive
operations, were not mounted. Four of the thirty-two pounder barbette
guns were on pivot carriages, which gave them the entire range of the
horizon, and others have a horizontal sweep of fire of one hundred and
eighty degrees. The magazine contained seven hundred barrels of
gunpowder, and an ample supply of shot, powder and shells for one year’s
siege, and a large amount of miscellaneous artillery stores. The work
was amply supplied with water from artificial wells. In a defensive or
strategical point of view, Fort Sumter radiates its fire through all the
channels from the sea approach to Charleston, and has a full sweep of
range in its rear or city side. The maximum range of the guns from
Sumter is three miles; but for accurate firing, sufficient to hull a
vessel, the distance would require to be reduced one-half of that
figure. The war garrison of the fort is six hundred men, but only
seventy-nine were within its walls at the time of the attack, exclusive
of laborers.

Fort Sumter is three and three-eighths miles from Charleston, one and
one-fourth mile from Fort Moultrie, three-fourths of a mile from
Cummings Point, one and three-eighths mile from Fort Johnson, and two
and five-eighths miles from Castle Pinckney. The city of Charleston is
entirely out of range of the guns of Fort Sumter.

The forts and batteries in the possession of the Confederate forces at
this time may be briefly described as follows:


                             FORT MOULTRIE.

Fort Moultrie, which first opened its batteries upon Major Anderson and
his command, is one of the sentinels that guard the principal entrance
of Charleston harbor. It is opposite to and distant from Fort Sumter
about one and a half miles. Its armament consists of eleven guns of
heavy calibre and several mortars. The outer and inner walls are of
brick, capped with stone and filled with earth, making a solid wall
fifteen or sixteen feet in thickness.


                       THE IRON FLOATING BATTERY.

This novel war machine, designed for harbor operations, was anchored
near Sullivan’s Island, commanding the barbette guns of Fort Sumter. It
was constructed of Palmetto logs, sheathed with plate iron, and supposed
to be impregnable against shot. It was embrasured for and mounted four
guns of heavy calibre, requiring sixty men to operate it. The outer or
gun side was covered with six plates of iron—two of them of the T
railroad pattern, placed horizontally, and the other four bolted one
over the other, in the strongest manner, and running vertically. The
wall of the gun side was full four feet thick, constructed of that
peculiar palmetto wood so full of fibrous material that sixty-four
pounders cannot pierce it. The main deck was wide and roomy, and kept in
place by four heavy wedges, driven down by a species of ram, which held
it fast, preventing any swaying around by the tide.


                      CUMMINGS POINT IRON BATTERY.

The nearest point of land to Fort Sumter is Cummings Point, distant
1,150 yards. On this point was the celebrated railroad iron battery,
having a heavy framework of yellow pine logs. The roof was of the same
material, over which dovetailed bars of railroad iron of the T pattern
were laid from top to bottom—all of which was riveted down in the most
secure manner. On the front it presented an angle of about thirty
degrees. There were three port-holes, which opened and closed with iron
shutters of the heaviest description. When open, the muzzles of the
columbiads filled up the space completely. The recoil of the gun enabled
the shutters to be closed instantly. The columbiad guns, with which this
novel battery was equipped bore on the south wall of Sumter, the line of
fire being at an angle of about thirty-five degrees.


The Fort Johnson batteries consist of two large sand works, containing
mortar and siege-gun batteries.


                            CASTLE PINCKNEY.

Castle Pinckney is a small work, situated on the southern extremity of
“Shute’s Folly Island,” between the Hog and Folly channels. Though in
itself not a very considerable military work, yet, from its position,
commanding as it does the whole line of the eastern wharves, it becomes
of the utmost importance. The height of the rampart is twenty, and the
width thirty-two feet. The width of the outer wall and of the parapet is
six feet; the depth of the casemates is twenty feet, height ten; the
diameter (east and west) of the castle is one hundred and seventy feet.
The entrance is on the northern side, on either side of which are the
officers and privates’ quarters, mess-room, &c. The armament of this
castle consists of about twenty-five pieces, 24 and 32-pounders, a few
sea-coast mortars and six columbiads.




                      BOMBARDMENT OF FORT SUMTER.


Major Anderson made good use of the hour awarded to him, that one solemn
hour which stood between a peaceful, happy country, so blessed that it
had forgotten to be grateful, and the most terrible war that ever,
without cause, deluged a free soil with the blood of its own sons. Were
ever sixty minutes, since the creation of time, so portentous with fate?

But that little band of men had no time for such thoughts. No sooner had
the deputation withdrawn than each officer and soldier was at his post.
They had two flags at the fort, a large garrison flag, which Major
Anderson raised when he took up his quarters at Sumter, and a smaller
one, called the storm-flag; the former had a slight tip in it, and he
ordered the storm-flag to be raised in its stead.

Sentinels were immediately removed from the parapets of Fort Sumter, the
posterns closed, the flag drawn up, and an order sent to the troops not
to leave the bomb-proofs, on any account, until summoned by the drum. At
4.30 A. M. one bombshell was thrown at Sumter, bursting immediately over
the fort.

This was the first gun of the rebellion. How awfully its reverberations
have thundered through the land! How little did the prompters of that
attack upon the old flag dream of the horrors that were to follow!

[Illustration:

  BOMBARDMENT OF FORT SUMTER

  1. Cummings’ Point Iron Battery.
  2. Fort Sumter.
  3. Sullivan’s Island.
  4. The Iron Floating Battery.
  5. Fort Moultrie.
  6. Charleston.
]

After the pause of a few moments the firing became general on the part
of the batteries of the secessionists, doing the greatest credit to the
artillerists. Battery after battery joined in the murderous attack. The
Major took it very calmly—divided his men into companies to relieve each
other—had their scanty breakfast prepared, which they partook of in
silence, while the iron hail was crashing against their walls—prepared
additional cartridges by tearing up the flannel shirts of the men, their
bed-clothes, etc.,—got out a supply of powder from the magazine—and
after nearly four hours’ silence, the fort at last opened most
vigorously on their assailants. Hot coffee was kept in the boiler in the
cook room for the men to partake of whenever they pleased, and they
worked the guns with a will. They fired but few shells, for the only
guns for that kind of ammunition were the barbette guns on the open
rampart, many of which were dismounted by the continuous fire of the
enemy, and the serving of which, from the lack of casemate protection,
would have rapidly thinned out the Major’s little band.

As the number of men was so small, and the garrison so nearly exhausted
by the several months of siege which they had gone through, it was
necessary to husband their strength. The command was therefore divided
into three reliefs, or equal parties, who were to work the different
batteries by turns, each four hours.

The first relief opened upon the iron batteries at Cummings Point, at a
distance of 1,600 yards, the iron floating battery, distant 1,800 or
2,000 yards at the end of Sullivan’s Island, the enfilading battery on
Sullivan’s Island, and Fort Moultrie. This was at 7 o’clock in the
morning, Captain Doubleday firing the first gun, and all the points
named above being opened upon simultaneously. For the first four hours
the firing was kept up with great rapidity; the enthusiasm of the men,
indeed, was so spirited that the second and third reliefs could not be
kept from the guns. This accounts for the fact that double the number of
guns were at work during the first four hours than at any other time.

Shells burst with the greatest rapidity in every portion of the work,
hurling the loose brick and stone in all directions, breaking the
windows, and setting fire to whatever woodwork they burst against. The
solid shot firing of the enemy’s batteries, and particularly of Fort
Moultrie, were directed at the barbette guns of Fort Sumter, disabling
one ten-inch columbiad, (they had but two,) one eight-inch columbiad,
one forty-two pounder, and two eight-inch sea-coast howitzers, and also
tearing a large portion of the parapet away. The firing from the
batteries on Cummings Point was scattered over the whole of the gorge,
or rear, of the fort, riddling it like a sieve. The explosion of shells,
and the quantity of deadly missiles that were hurled in every direction
and at every instant of time, made it almost certain death to go out of
the lower tier of casemates, and also made the working of the barbette,
or upper uncovered guns, which contained all of our heaviest metals, and
by which alone we could throw shells, quite impossible. During the first
day there was hardly an instant of time that there was a cessation of
the whizzing of balls, which were sometimes coming half a dozen at once.
There was not a portion of the work which was not seen in reverse (that
is, exposed by the rear) from mortars.

On Friday, before dinner, several of the vessels of the fleet beyond the
bar were seen through the port-holes. They dipped their flags. The
commander ordered Sumter’s flag to be dipped in return, which was done,
while the shells were bursting in every direction. [The flagstaff was
located in the parade, which is about the centre of the open space
within the fort.] Sergeant Hart saw the flag of Fort Sumter half way
down, and, supposing that it had been cut by the enemy’s shot, rushed
out through the fire to assist in getting it up. Shortly after it had
been re-raised, a shell burst and cut the halyards, but the rope was so
intertwined around the halyards, that the flag would not fall.

The cartridges were exhausted about noon, and a party was sent to the
magazines to make cartridges of the remaining blankets and shirts, the
sleeves of the latter being readily converted into the purpose desired.
Another great misfortune was, that there was not an instrument in the
fort by which they could weigh powder, which of course destroyed all
attempt at accuracy of firing. Nor had they tangent scales, breech
sides, or other instruments with which to point a gun.

When it became so dark as to render it impossible to see the effect of
their shot, the port-holes were closed for the night, while the
batteries of the secessionists continued their fire the whole night.

During Friday, the officers’ barracks were three times set on fire by
the shells, and three times put out under the most galling and
destructive firing. This was the only occasion on which Major Anderson
allowed the men to expose themselves without an absolute necessity. The
guns on the parapet, which had been pointed the day before, were fired
clandestinely by some of the men.

The firing of the rifled guns from the iron battery on Cummings Point
became extremely accurate in the afternoon of Friday, cutting out large
quantities of the masonry about the embrasures at every shot, throwing
concrete among the cannoneers, slightly wounding one man, and stunning
others. One piece struck Sergeant Kearnan, an old Mexican war veteran,
on the head and knocked him down. Upon being revived, he was asked if he
was hurt badly. He replied: “No; I was only knocked down temporarily,”
and he went to work again.

Meals were served at the guns of the cannoneers, while the guns were
being fired and pointed. The fire commenced in the morning as soon as
possible.

During Friday night the men endeavored to climb the flagstaff, for the
purpose of fastening new halyards, the old ones having been cut by the
shot, but found it impossible. The flag remained fast.

For the fourth time the barracks were set on fire early on Saturday
morning, and attempts were made to put it out. But it was soon
discovered that red-hot shot were being thrown into the fort with the
greatest rapidity, and it became evident that it would be impossible to
put out the conflagration. The whole garrison was then set at work, or
as many as could be spared, to remove the powder from the magazines. It
was desperate work, rolling barrels of powder through the fire.

Ninety odd barrels had been rolled out through the flames, when the heat
became so great as to make it impossible to get out any more. The doors
were then closed and locked, and the fire spread and became general. The
wind so directed the smoke as to fill the fort so full that the men
could not see each other, and with the hot, stifling air, it was as much
as a man could do to breathe. Soon they were obliged to cover their
faces with wet cloths in order to breathe at all, so dense was the smoke
and so scorching the heat.

But few cartridges were left, and the guns were fired slowly; nor could
more cartridges be made, on account of the sparks falling in every part
of the works. A gun was fired every now and then only to let the fleet
and the people in the town know that the fort had not been silenced. The
cannoneers could not see to aim, much less where the shot fell.

After the barracks were well on fire, the batteries directed upon Fort
Sumter increased their cannonading to a rapidity greater than had been
attained before. About this time, the shells and ammunition in the upper
service-magazines exploded, scattering the tower and upper portions of
the building in every direction. The crash of the beams, the roar of the
flames, the rapid explosion of the shells, and the shower of fragments
of the fort, with the blackness of the smoke, made the scene
indescribably terrific and grand. This continued for several hours.
Meanwhile the main gates were burned down, the chassis of the barbette
guns were burned away on the gorge, and the upper portions of the towers
had been demolished by shells.

There was not a portion of the fort where a breath of air could be
obtained for hours, except through a wet cloth. The fire spread to the
men’s quarters, on the right hand and on the left, and endangered the
powder which had been taken out of the magazines. The men went through
the fire and covered the barrels with wet cloths, but the danger of the
fort’s blowing up became so imminent, that they were obliged to heave
the barrels out of the embrasures. While the powder was being thrown
overboard, all the guns of Moultrie, of the iron floating battery, of
the enfilade battery, and the Dahlgren battery, worked with increased
fury.

All but four barrels were thus disposed of, and those remaining were
wrapped in many thicknesses of wet woolen blankets. But three cartridges
were left, and these were in the guns. About this time the flagstaff of
Fort Sumter was shot down, some fifty feet from the truck, this being
the ninth time that it had been struck by a shot. A man cried out, “The
flag is down; it has been shot away!” In an instant, Lieutenant Hall
rushed forward and brought the flag away. But the halyards were so
inextricably tangled that it could not be righted; it was, therefore,
nailed to the staff, and planted upon the ramparts, while batteries in
every direction were playing upon them.

A few moments after, and a man was seen with a white flag tied to his
sword, who desired admission. He was admitted through an embrasure. In a
great flurry, he said he was General Wigfall, and that he came from
General Beauregard, and added that he had seen that Sumter’s flag was
down. Lieutenant Davis replied, “Oh, sir! but it is up again.” The
cannonading meanwhile continued. General Wigfall asked that some one
might hold his flag outside. Lieutenant Davis replied, “No, sir! we
don’t raise a white flag. If you want your batteries to stop, you must
stop them.” General Wigfall then held the flag out of an embrasure. As
soon as he had done this, Lieutenant Davis directed a corporal to
relieve him, as it was General Wigfall’s flag.

Several shots struck immediately around him while he was holding it out,
when he started back, and putting the flag in Wigfall’s face, said,
“D——n it; I won’t hold that flag, for they don’t respect it. They struck
their colors, but we never did.” Wigfall replied, “They fired at me
three or four times, and I should think you ought to stand it once.”
Wigfall then placed the white flag on the outside of the embrasure, and
presented himself to Major Anderson, and said that General Beauregard
was desirous that blood should not be unnecessarily shed, and also
stated that he came from General Beauregard, who desired to know if
Major Anderson would evacuate the fort, and that if he would do so he
might choose his own terms.

After a moment’s hesitation Major Anderson replied that he would go out
on the same terms that he (Major Anderson) had mentioned on the 11th.
General Wigfall then said: “Very well; then it is understood that you
will evacuate. This is all I have to do. You military men will arrange
everything else on your own terms.” He then departed, the white flag
still waving where he had placed it, and the stars and stripes streaming
from the flagstaff which had become the target of the rebels.

Shortly after his departure Major Lee, the Hon. Porcher Miles, Senator
Chesnut, and the Hon. Roger A. Pryor, the staff of General Beauregard,
approached the fort with a white flag, and said they had come from
General Beauregard, who had observed that the flag had been down and
raised again a few minutes afterward. The General had sent over,
desiring to know if he could render any assistance, as he had observed
the fort was on fire. (This was perhaps a delicate mode of asking for a
surrender.) Major Anderson, in reply, requested them to thank General
Beauregard for the offer, but it was too late, as he had just agreed
with General Beauregard for an evacuation. The three persons comprising
the deputation, looked at each other blankly, and asked with whom? Major
Anderson, observing that there was something wrong, remarked that
General Wigfall, who had just left, had represented himself to be an aid
to General Beauregard, and that he had come over to make the
proposition.

After some conversation among themselves, they said to Major Anderson
that Wigfall had not seen General Beauregard for two days. Major
Anderson replied that Wigfall’s offer and its acceptance had placed him
in a peculiar position. They then requested him to place in writing what
General Wigfall had said to him, and they would lay it before General
Beauregard.

Before this reached General Beauregard, he sent his Adjutant-General and
other members of his staff, including the Hon. Roger A. Pryor and
Governor Manning, proposing the same conditions which Major Anderson had
offered to go out upon, with the exception only of not saluting the
flag. Major Anderson said that he had already informed General
Beauregard that he was going out. They asked him if he would not accept
of the terms without the salute. Major Anderson told them, No; but that
it should be an open point.

General Beauregard sent down to say that the terms had been accepted,
and that he would send the Isabel or any other vessel at his command to
convey Major Anderson and the troops to any port in the United States
which he might elect.

No braver men ever lived than the defenders of Fort Sumter; but the
ardor and endurance of musician Hall of Company E was remarked by every
man in Sumter, and the company presented him with a testimonial. He was
at the firing of the first guns, and fought on all day, and would not
accept either of the three reliefs. He was up at the first shot the next
day, and worked without cessation till night. His example and words of
cheer had great effect. This is the more worthy of remark as he belonged
to the musicians, and was not obliged to enter into the engagement at
all.

Mr. Hart, a volunteer from New York, particularly distinguished himself
in trying to put out the flames in the quarters, with shells and shot
crashing around him. He was ordered away by Major Anderson, but begged
hard to be permitted to remain and continue his exertions.

Never did famished men work more bravely than those who defended that
fortress, knowing, as they did, that if successfully defended and held
by them, there was not even a biscuit left to divide among them. They
never would have left it while a protecting wall stood around them, had
they been provided with provision and ammunition. Every man was true and
faithful to his post; hunger and want of ammunition alone caused them to
leave Fort Sumter. They were exposed to a most terrible fire from all
quarters, and it was only by exercising the utmost care that the
officers were enabled to preserve the men from a terrible slaughter.
Fort Sumter in itself was hardly worth the holding; had there been the
full fighting complement of men within its walls, the fort would not
have afforded suitable protection for one-half of them. The enemy’s shot
rained in upon and about them like hail, and more men in Sumter would
only have made greater havoc. As it was, the garrison proved fortunate
in having escaped without the loss of one of those brave men who were
willing to die for the flag which waved over them.

The evacuation took place about 9½ o’clock on Sunday morning, after the
burial with military honors of private Daniel Hough, who had been killed
by the bursting of a gun. The men had been all the morning preparing
cartridges for the purpose of firing a salute of one hundred guns. This
done, the embarkation took place, the band meanwhile playing Yankee
Doodle.


             STORMING OF FORT SUMTER, VIEWED FROM THE LAND.

A person who witnessed the bombardment of Fort Sumter from the harbor,
gives this graphic account:

The terrific firing reached an awful climax at ten o’clock at night. The
heavens were obscured by rain clouds, and it was as dark as Erebus. The
guns were heard distinctly, the wind blowing in shore. Sometimes a shell
would burst in mid-air, directly over Fort Sumter. Nearly all night long
the streets were thronged with people, full of excitement and
enthusiasm. The house-tops, the battery, the wharves, the shipping,—in
fact every available place was taken possession of by the multitude.

The discharges of cannon gradually diminished as the sun rose. All the
clouds, which rendered the night so dark and dismal, disappeared as day
began to break, while the air became most beautiful, balmy, and
refreshing. The streets were filled again with persons, male and female,
old and young, white and black; some went to the battery, some to the
wharves, and some to the steeples of the churches.

A few random shots were fired from the Confederate batteries, to which
Fort Sumter only replied occasionally. Soon it became evident that
Sumter was on fire, and all eyes were rivetted upon it. The dense smoke
that issued from it was seen gradually to rise from the ramparts. Some
supposed that this was merely a signal from Major Anderson to call in
the fleet to aid him.

At this time the fleet was in the offing quietly riding at anchor, and
could clearly be distinguished. Four vessels were ranged in line
directly over the bar, apparently blockading the port. Their long, black
hulls and smoke stacks proved them to be Federal steamers. Every one
anxiously waited to see what they would do. The suspense was very
exciting. On all sides could be heard,

“Will the vessels come in and engage the batteries? If they do not they
are cowardly poltroons.”

Every person on the battery fully expected that the engagement would
become general. By the aid of glasses, it was believed that a movement
was being made to this end by two of the war ships, and it was thought
that the sand would soon begin to fly from the Morris Island batteries.

At ten o’clock in the morning, attention was again rivetted on Fort
Sumter, which was now beyond a doubt on fire. The flames were seen to
burst from the roofs of the houses within its walls, and dense columns
of smoke shot quickly upward.

At this time Major Anderson scarcely fired a shot. The guns on the
ramparts of Fort Sumter had no utterance in them. Burst shells and grape
scattered like hail over the doomed fort, and drove the soldiers under
cover.

From the Iron Battery at Cummings Point a continuous fire was kept up.
Its rifled cannon played sad havoc with that portion of Fort Sumter
facing it. The firing from the Floating Battery and from Fort Moultrie
continued very regular and accurate. Standing on the Charleston battery,
and looking seaward, you have on the right a mortar battery and Fort
Johnson, distant from the city two and a half miles. Half a mile from
Fort Johnson is the Iron Battery of Cummings Point, mounting three
ten-inch columbiads, three sixty-four-pounders, three mortars, and one
rifled cannon. Cummings Point is only fifteen hundred yards from Fort
Sumter, and so any one can imagine what havoc the regular fire of the
Cummings Point battery must have created.

The men working the guns made them terribly effective. The sand redoubt
was scarcely injured by the weak fire Major Anderson kept up on the
battery. It was commanded by Major Stevens, of the Citadel Cadets. Under
his direction each shell that was fired found a destination within Fort
Sumter, and during the entire bombardment scarcely one missile of this
character missed its mark.

On the other side of the harbor, directly opposite Fort Sumter, is one
of the strongest sides of Fort Moultrie. During the last three months it
has been strengthened by every appliance that military art could
suggest. Its marlons, moats, glaces, and embrasures are perfectly
protected. The weak walls of the fort were made perfectly secure for the
gunners while at work. From this point throughout the engagement vast
numbers of shot and heavy balls were discharged.

Behind this, and near Sullivan’s Island, the Floating Battery was
stationed, with two sixty-four and two forty-two pounders. Its sides of
iron and palmetto logs were impenetrable. Every shot from it told on
Fort Sumter, and the men in charge of it were so secure in their
position, that some of them indulged in soldiers’ pastimes, while others
played five cent ante, euchre and bluff.

The Mortar Battery at Mount Pleasant was five hundred yards from the
Floating Battery, and was mounted with two mortars within excellent
range of Fort Sumter. The shells from this mortar were thrown with great
precision. You now have all the positions of the works bearing directly
on Fort Sumter.

All through Friday morning the greatest activity at all points was
displayed. Three times Major Anderson’s barracks were set on fire, and
twice he succeeded in putting out the flames, and to do this it was
necessary to employ all his force in passing along water. To get water
it was necessary for some of his men to go outside the walls, and hand
the buckets in through the port-holes, during all which time they were
exposed to a most terrific fire from the various batteries.

This last expedient was not resorted to until the fort was on fire for
the third time, and the flames had increased to an alarming pitch.
Meantime, Major Anderson’s guns were silent. He allowed his men to be
exposed to the galling fire upon them but for a few moments, and then
ordered them in and shut the batteries as the smoke was too thick to
work them. At noon the flames burst from every quarter of Fort Sumter,
and its destruction appeared inevitable.


               NAVAL EXPEDITION FOR THE RELIEF OF SUMTER.

The Government had sent a well-laden fleet to the relief of Fort Sumter,
a portion of which arrived in Charleston harbor time enough to witness
the bombardment of the fort, without the power to help its heroic
garrison.

This fleet left New York and Washington from the 6th to the 9th of
April. It consisted of the sloop-of-war, Pawnee, 10 guns, and 200 men;
Pocahontas, 5 guns, 110 men; cutter Harriet Lane, 5 guns, 110 men;
accompanied by the transport Baltic, and the steam-tugs Yankee and Uncle
Ben, with additional men and stores. Owing to stormy weather, the
vessels were unable to reach the Charleston coast at the appointed time.
The Pawnee, Harriet Lane, and the Baltic arrived at the rendezvous on
the morning of the 12th April, but the Pocahontas did not join them
until the next day. The steamtug Yankee lost her smoke-stack in the
storm which dispersed the fleet, and did not reach the neighborhood of
Charleston till after the departure of her consorts, and eventually
returned to New York. Nothing was heard of the Uncle Ben until the 30th
of April, when intelligence was received that she had been captured by
the insurgents off the coast of North Carolina.

The orders of the expedition were, that unarmed boats should first be
sent to the fort with stores only; but if these were fired upon, every
effort was to be made to relieve the fort by stratagem or force. The
vessels of war and the Baltic proved of too heavy draft for any hopes of
passing the bar, and the steam-tugs which were to have been sent in with
supplies, failed to make their appearance. The attack on the fort,
before any measures of a peaceable character could be adopted for its
relief, left no alternative but force, to the commandant of the fleet,
if the object of his expedition was to be accomplished. A consultation
of officers was held at four o’clock on the afternoon of the 12th, and
the following plan was agreed upon: the Pawnee and the Harriet Lane were
to remain at anchor during the night; at dawn, on the 13th, the Pawnee
was to hoist out her armed launches, and the Baltic was to put her boats
alongside, freighted with the provisions and troops designed for the
fort. The war vessels were then to tow the boats as far as possible on
their perilous journey, when they were to be cast off, and allowed to
pursue their course toward the fort, relying upon the guns of the
men-of-war, and what aid might be extended from Sumter, to protect them
from the batteries and flotilla of armed boats, which were in readiness
to dispute their advance. During the night the Baltic went aground on
Rattlesnake Shoals, and the plan agreed upon was, from necessity,
relinquished. The conflagration of the barracks of the fort having
precipitated its evacuation earlier than was anticipated, the officers
of the fleet abandoned other plans for its relief.

At two o’clock on the 14th of April, Major Anderson and the garrison of
Fort Sumter were received on board the Baltic, and the fleet shortly
after sailed for New York. The flag of the fort was borne at the
mast-head of the Baltic as she entered the bay of New York, where it was
saluted by guns from every fort in the harbor, and hailed by the shouts
of more than a hundred thousand people, who lined the wharves of the
city. It was also raised over the equestrian statue of Washington in
Union Square, in that city, when the great Union meeting was held on the
afternoon of Saturday, April 20.




                         THE NATION’S RESPONSE.


The first gun that boomed against Fort Sumter struck the great American
Union with a shock that vibrated from the centre to its outer verge.
Every heart, true or false to the great Union, leaped to the sound,
either in patriotism or treason, on that momentous day.

The North and South recoiled from each other; the one in amazement at
the audacity of this first blow against the Union, the other rushing
blindly after a few leaders, who had left them little choice of action,
and no power of deliberation. The first news of the attack took the
Government at Washington almost by surprise. President Lincoln and his
Cabinet had not allowed themselves to believe that a civil war could
absolutely break out in the heart of a country so blessed, so wealthy,
and so accustomed to peace. True, political strife had waged fearfully;
sections had clamored against sections, factions North had battled with
factions South; but in a country where free speech and a free press were
a crowning glory, a war of words and ideas could hardly have been
expected to culminate in one of the most terrible civil wars that will
crimson the world’s record.

The first boom of the cannon’s blackened lips—the first shot hurled
against the stars and stripes, aroused the Government from its hopes of
security. Scarcely had the telegraph wires ceased to tremble under the
startling news, before the Cabinet assembled in President Lincoln’s
council chamber, and when it broke up, a proclamation, calling for
seventy-five thousand troops, had been decided upon, and Congress was to
be convened on the Fourth of July.

The startling news, this prompt action, and the defenceless state of
Washington, filled the country with wild excitement. It was known that
the South had been for months drilling troops; that large portions of
Virginia and Maryland were ready for revolt, and many believed that
bodies of men were organized and prepared for an attack on the capital.
Had this been true, had a considerable number of men marched upon
Washington any time within four days after the news from Fort Sumter
reached it, nothing could have saved it from capture, and probably,
destruction. With only a handful of troops, and exposed at every point,
no effectual resistance could have been made. The news reached
Washington on Sunday; the next day such troops as could be mustered,
appeared on parade. Pickets were stationed outside the town; horses were
galloped furiously from point to point, and the first faint indication
of this most awful civil war dawned upon a people so used to peace, that
its import could not be wholly realized.

Smothered alarm prevailed in the city; a military guard was placed each
night in the White House, and great anxiety was felt for the arrival of
troops, which had been hastily summoned from the North.

That week the near friends of the President were under painful
apprehensions for his safety. It was known to a few persons that the
very gang of men who had planned his death at Baltimore, were in the
neighborhood of the capital, plotting against him there. It was even
known that a design existed by which a sudden descent of swift riders
was to be made on the White House, with the bold object of killing
Lincoln in his cabinet, or carrying him off by force into Virginia. The
night-guard in the Presidential mansion was but small, and by day
Lincoln had always been imprudently accessible.

The persons believed to be in this plot were brave, reckless men,
accustomed to adventures of every kind, and quite capable of carrying
out a programme of abduction or bloodshed under more difficult
circumstances than surrounded this enterprise. But men of reckless
action are seldom prudent in speech; the wild project was too exciting
for proper reticence. By a few incautious words, dropped here and there,
this treasonable design was fathomed; the friends of President Lincoln
warned, and the whole thing quietly defeated, for the gang soon
ascertained that their treason had been discovered, and, as its success
depended on a surprise of the President’s household, the project was
abandoned.

Meantime the news of Fort Sumter, and the call for troops, had shot its
lightning along every telegraph in the Union; the response was an
instantaneous uprising of the people, such as no country on earth ever
witnessed before.

The great majesty of the Union had been insulted and set at defiance,
and as one man, thousands upon thousands rushed around the worshipped
banner of their country, firm in their patriotism, and terrible in their
determination that it should never be trailed in the dust, or torn with
hostile shot, unavenged.

The proclamation of President Lincoln calling for volunteers, was
answered by the voices of freemen from every hill-top and valley, and
almost fabulous numbers stood ready and anxious to devote themselves to
the vindication of the national honor. Wild indeed was the enthusiasm
that ran from heart to heart, linking the great west and the east
together. But one sentiment found expression from any lip among the
excited populace, and that sentiment was, the Union should be sustained
at all hazards. Wealth, life, everything must be counted as dust till
the Union had redeemed itself. Who in New York does not remember how the
city was ablaze with flags and tri-colored bunting on the memorable day,
when, “the Seventh regiment,” responded to the call? Never did a finer
or braver body of young men pass down Broadway. Although their arms were
not now corded or hands hardened by labor, their prompt action was a
living proof that gentle breeding can be associated with hearts of oak,
with stern determination, coolness and discretion. Leaping to their arms
at the first note of danger, impatient of delay and thrilling with the
hope of weaving in their peace-won wreaths laurels earned by hard
fighting, this regiment marched from its armory, the very first of the
Empire State to obey the call to arms. Their object was war. They hoped
ardently that it was no light duty which might fall upon them. They
expected to meet hard work and hard fighting too before the capital was
reached, for danger menaced them on all sides. Baltimore had risen in
revolt even while they were arming for the march and they fully depended
on fighting their way through its turbulent streets.

On the 19th of April, at the very time revolt broke out in Baltimore, a
very different scene was going on in New York.

Amidst unparalleled enthusiasm the volunteer soldiers of New England and
New York struck hands on their march to the rescue of the national
capital. And beautiful the streets looked, with bannered parapets,
peopled roofs, windows thronged with sympathetic beauty, and sidewalks
densely packed with multitudes of excited and applauding citizens.

But it required only a single glance at the faces of this great
multitude to become convinced that no mere gala or festive purpose had
called out this magnificent demonstration. In every eye burned the
unquenchable fire of patriotic ardor, and in every heart was the
aspiration to join in defence of one common country. Old men, who must
have seen the earlier struggles of our history, came forth to bless the
young soldiers on their march to take share in a grander and more noble
struggle than any the American continent had yet witnessed.

Mothers, with tears of joyous pride half blinding them, helped to buckle
on the accoutrements of their sons, and kissed them as they went forth
to battle. Sisters and sweethearts, fathers and wives, friends and
relatives, all were represented, and had their individual
characteristics in the immense concourse of life which held possession
of Broadway.

Perhaps if there could have risen from the dead one of the old
Girondists, after being bloodily put away to repose during the great
French Revolution, and if he had been dropped down in New York,—by
allowing a little for advance in costumes and architecture, he might
have seen many curious points of resemblance between the scenes and
those of seventy years ago in Paris. Then the inspiration of liberty ran
through the people, and the most powerful aristocracy of Europe was
destroyed. The result of the struggle which broke out in New York, and
in the streets of Baltimore, in one day, time has yet to reveal.

The children of New York, the Seventh regiment, the pets and pride of
her society, were going forth to their first war duty. Eight hundred
chosen young men, with threads woven to hold them, wherever they went,
to the million hearts they left behind—moved down Broadway and started
for the capital.

Eight hundred young citizens, each with musket and knapsack, borne along
calmly and impassively on a tide of vocal patriotism, making the air
resonant with shouts and warm with the breath of prayer.

With that regiment went young Winthrop, on that memorable day, who
afterwards passed from the literary fame he had so richly earned, to
military glory at the battle of Big Bethel. There also was O’Brien, one
of the most promising poets of the age, doomed like Winthrop to reap
bloody laurels, and fill a soldier’s grave. Let no one say that the
Empire State was not nobly represented in these young soldiers.
Gentlemen as they were, one and all, no man was heard to complain of
hard work, soldiers’ fare, or no fare at all, as sometimes happened to
them. How cheerful they were in the cedar groves for two days and
nights—how they endured the hardships of a bivouac on soft earth—how
they digged manfully in the trenches. With what supreme artistic finish
their work was achieved—how they cleared the brushwood from the
glacis—how they blistered their hands and then hardened them with
toil—how they chafed at being obliged to evade Baltimore, and how
faithfully they guarded Washington and achieved the object for which
they were sent, will be best given in a description of the march from
Annapolis of which O’Brien has left a brilliant record.

Nor were their services in protecting the capital all that the Seventh
regiment of New York has given to its country. Many a regiment which has
since won lasting fame on the battle-field has been officered to some
extent from its ranks.

Two days after the departure of the Seventh regiment, the Seventy-first,
since renowned for its bravery at Bull Run, the Sixth, and Twelfth, all
city regiments of New York, took the same glorious track, and were
hailed with like enthusiasm. In military drill and social position, some
of these regiments were not inferior to the Seventh, and their departure
was witnessed by a concourse of people equal to that which filled the
streets on the 19th.

It was with pride that a city saw her first quota of soldiers departing
_en route_ for Washington, to take the Empire share with the troops of
other loyal states in the contest now inaugurated. The spectacle,
instead of being a great pageant, had all the grandeur and solemnity of
a step in one of those crises of events which involve individual and
national life—engraving new names and new dynasties upon the tablets of
history.

As if to make the departure of these troops more memorable, a large
American flag, forty feet long by twenty wide, was flung out upon a
flagstaff from a window in Trinity steeple, at a height of two hundred
and forty feet. The chimes meanwhile played several airs appropriate to
the occasion, among which were “Yankee Doodle,” “The Red, White and
Blue,” winding up with “All’s Well.” A flagstaff with a splendid flag
attached, was also run out of a window over the portico in front of St.
Paul’s Church. Thus under these mighty banners, furling and unfurling in
the wind and hedged in by triple walls of human beings, amid the
resonant chimes of Trinity, the crash of their own magnificent bands
drowning the “God bless you” of many a gentle heart, the city of New
York sent its first regiments to the field.

As each regiment passed through New York the concourse of people to see
it off increased, till every fresh march was a triumph in advance of the
brave deeds the soldiers were expected to perform. In less than a week
banners and flags had become so thick across Broadway, that they fairly
canopied the departing troops, and shouts loud and deep sent them on the
way with many a blessing and hearty God speed.

Nor was this enthusiasm confined to crack regiments or the aristocratic
soldiery of our cities. The working-men also came forth in masses,
claiming a share in the glorious work. Of this class was the Sixth
Massachusetts regiment, which had just baptized its colors in the
streets of Baltimore, taking lead even of the chivalric regiments of the
Empire City. Of this class was the thrice glorious Sixty-ninth, as brave
a body of warmhearted Irishmen as ever trod the earth. Perhaps the
greatest crowd that ever gathered to see a regiment off assembled when
this body of adopted citizens marched forth under the star-spangled
banner and the green flag of old Ireland. On that day human nature
acknowledged its own universal kinship. The work-shop and the
counting-room, the parlor and the basement met for once on a level of
noble enthusiasm. The palace and the tenement house gave forth their
inmates alike, for it was a common country which these men went forth to
defend with their strength and, alas, their lives.

Proud mothers and wives and sisters, who had watched their beloved ones
march off in the ranks of some favorite regiment, looked down from
balconies and windows with tearful eyes upon the crowd of women who
lined the pavements.

More particularly was this manifest on the departure of the Sixty-ninth.
What warm, true hearts crowded the pavements that day! Old women, little
children, whole households clung together, sorrowful but O, how proud of
the valor that filled their eyes with tears.

If there was weeping on the pavement, it was answered with a feeling of
gentle sisterhood from the balcony and window. The same bright eyes that
had seen the Seventh, Seventy-first, Twelfth and other regiments pass,
through a mist of tears, filled with sympathetic moisture when they saw
these poor wives and mothers break through all restraint and rush wildly
into the ranks for one more kiss, a hand-clasp, or, if no more, a last
glance of loving recognition.

Perhaps some of these highly bred females envied the social freedom
which allowed these women of the people to follow their husbands and
brothers up to the moment of embarkation, without a thought of the world
beyond. Many an embroidered handkerchief was waved, and many a sweet
blessing murmured in gentle sympathy with these sister women when those
hard-working, hard fighting, gloriously brave men went forth to earn
imperishable renown.

Not only in New York, but all over the North and West these ovations
were repeated. Boston Common was one scene of mustering forces, and its
streets a panorama of armed men. Every State over which the blessed old
star-spangled banner flung its folds, sent forth its sons, only
complaining that so few were accepted. Like a prairie fire when the
grass is dry, the war spirit leaped from town to town, and from State to
State, till the whole North was ablaze with it.

Troops mustered into companies and massed themselves into regiments in
the North and the great West so numerous and so fast that a swift pen
might fail to keep the record. The uprising was general. Along our water
courses, along our railroads, down the broad avenues of our cities,
regiment after regiment swept a continued stream of armed men, all
bearing toward the capital. For the whole great North rose as one man
and sprang to arms. The plough was left in the furrow—the hammer upon
the anvil—the saw upon the bench—the reaper in mid prairie—the shuttle
in the loom—the pen upon the ledger—the engine untended—the press
unfed—the busy sails of commerce unfurled, and the whirring mill
unsupplied. A patient people had arisen in its might, with clear steel
and the rolling thunder of cannon they were prepared to uphold the
sacred majesty of the Union flag, while a splinter remained of the
staff, or a shred of the fabric! An electric flash stirred the
long-patient and dumb millions to life and speech, and under the red
ensign of war they rallied in the common cause.

No one State or town could claim pre-eminence in patriotic fervor over
its neighbors, for no where did this wild enthusiasm find check or
hindrance. Our great cities could only claim superiority over the
smaller towns from the hospitality with which they received troops from
the country and cheered them onward to the battle field. Boston,
Portland, New Haven, New York, Philadelphia, and the leading Western
cities formed a great thoroughfare for the mustering army, for the
country around poured their patriotic masses through the streets of
these cities, and the press gave eclat to the movements which reflected
back upon the cities themselves. But in the great North and the great
West there was no nook or corner where this patriotic furor did not
exist.

Monster Union meetings were held in every city of the loyal States, and
within an incredibly short time, _Three Hundred and Fifty Thousand_ men
responded to the call of the President. Great as the number was, it
proved but small to what would have volunteered had they been needed, or
could they have been accepted, for with bonfires blazing upon every
hill, and flags waving from every house-top—with the red, white and blue
upon every breast, and the long roll beating in every heart—with wives
sending their husbands—mothers their sons and girls their lovers, such a
battle cry was raised as the earth had never listened to, and nations of
the old world heard with astonishment.




                     REINFORCEMENT OF FORT PICKENS.

                            APRIL 12, 1861.


The Navy Yard and forts in the harbor of Pensacola, from their extent
and importance, were particularly the objects of insurgent ambition.
General Bragg and his counsellors had so adroitly arranged their plans
that it was confidently expected that the government forts, buildings
and property would fall into their peaceable occupation. On the 12th of
January, the navy yard and barracks, together with Fort Barrancas, fell
into their possession, and shortly afterwards Fort McRae met with the
same fate; but Lieutenant Slemmer, the United States officer in command
of the forts of Pensacola harbor, courageously threw his small force of
eighty-two men into Fort Pickens, and had thus far held at bay the large
army of insurgents who were preparing to attack him.

The harbor of Pensacola is probably the largest and finest on the whole
coast of the Mexican Gulf. The bay is six miles wide and about twelve
long. The Warrington navy yard was seven miles by land from Pensacola
and six miles and three-quarters by water. About a mile from the navy
yard, west, stood Fort Barrancas, and a mile farther Fort McRae, which
commands the bar. Opposite Fort McRae was Fort Pickens, the channel
running between them. Near Fort Pickens was a redoubt. On the opposite
side of Pensacola, across the bay, Santa Rosa island extends several
miles to the bar, at the extremity of which is Fort Pickens. A vessel
coming into the harbor must necessarily pass between Fort Pickens and
Fort McRae, and in close proximity to Barrancas.

Fort Pickens is a bastioned work of the first class, built of New York
granite; its walls forty-five feet in height and twelve in thickness. It
is embrasured for two tiers of guns, placed under bomb-proof casemates,
besides having one tier _en barbette_. The work was commenced in 1848
and finished in 1853, at a cost of nearly one million dollars. Its war
complement of soldiers is 1,260. Its full armament consists of 210 guns,
howitzers, and mortars, of all calibres.

Simultaneous with the determination to reinforce Fort Sumter, the
government resolved to send relief to Fort Pickens, which was then
threatened by a force of 7,000 men under General Bragg, strongly
entrenched, and occupying the other forts in the harbor.

A fleet of six United States vessels lay in the harbor, and they had
been notified by General Bragg that he would immediately open fire upon
them and Fort Pickens also, should they attempt to reinforce the
garrison.

Previous to the 10th of April, the steam frigate Powhatan and the
transports Atlantic and Illinois had sailed from New York with troops,
ordnance and provisions, for Fort Pickens; but before their arrival at
that place, a bearer of dispatches from Washington reached the commander
of the naval forces in the bay, with instructions to reinforce the fort.
Between the hours of 11 and 12 o’clock on Friday night, April 12th, this
was accomplished without bloodshed. “As soon as it became dark,” said an
officer on board the sloop-of-war Brooklyn, one of the blockading fleet,
“we began work with good will and in earnest. At first the marines from
the frigate Sabine and the sloop St. Louis, came on board our vessel,
and immediately after the accomplishment of this, the anchor was hoisted
by the jolly old salts, with the merry chant of—

                     ‘General Jackson won the day,
                       Heave, yeo ho!
                     At New Orleans, the people say
                       Yeo, heave yeo!’

We ran as close to the shore as possible, came to anchor, and without a
moment’s delay, lowered the boats and filled them with troops.

“At 11 o’clock, Lieutenant Albert N. Smith, of Massachusetts, being in
command, they started on their mission, uncertain if they would live to
see the light of another day. As they left the side of the vessel, many
a ‘God cause you to succeed,’ came from the lips of the loyal men at my
side. If I live a thousand years I shall never forget the feelings I
experienced when I saw those brave fellows shake hands with their old
comrades. A tear would now and then glisten in the gloom, but be
instantly wiped away with a clenched hand. These men knew their danger,
and with the knowledge, dared to face it with a courage eminently worthy
of praise—and may they receive it!

“The party were instructed to send up signals should they be attacked,
and I do assure you never were keener eyes than ours on that eventful
night, as we pierced into the darkness, momentarily expecting to see a
rocket light up the midnight gloom; but none appeared. While we were
thus anxiously awaiting some evidence of the success or non-success of
their mission, a boat was hailed. A faint answer comes back: ‘Lieutenant
Smith and the boat’s crew!’ and in whispers we hear the news, ‘they have
been successful!’ Brother officers shake hands, and give Lieutenant
Smith that praise justly deserved by him. They went around inside of the
harbor, passed under the guns of Forts McRae and Barrancas without being
heard, and safely landed all the troops without molestation.

“This being successfully accomplished, it was almost instantly concluded
to make a new attempt, and orders were given that all the marines in the
squadron should take to their boats, preparatory to their being put in
the fort. This being done, the steamer Wyandotte took them in charge,
and towed them as far as she could go, when they left her and pulled
into the harbor, taking the same course the first party had, and in good
time reached the fort, and safely landed all who were in the boats. Just
as the day was breaking, we saw from our deck the boats shoving off from
the beach; and when they returned to us, our anchor was instantly ‘up,’
and we steaming to our old anchorage with very different sensations from
those we had when we started for the work. Thus the Brooklyn
accomplished what she was sent here for,—the reinforcement of Fort
Pickens in spite of General Bragg.”

A few days after this fort had been so nobly reinforced, the splendid
steamer Atlantic sailed into the Union fleet, laden with troops for the
fort. The next day she was joined by the frigate Powhatan, and again by
the Illinois, all laden with troops and military stores. Thus a thousand
more troops were thrown into the stronghold, which, with the fleet
outside, made it impregnable.

There is no doubt that an attack upon Fort Pickens was contemplated the
very night these reinforcements arrived. The assaulting party was
composed of five hundred picked men, two hundred and fifty of whom were
from the Mississippi Ninth, to be led by C. H. Harris of the Home Guard;
fifty from the Tenth Mississippi, and the others from other troops at
Pensacola. All necessary preparations were made for moving about 11
o’clock at night. The storming party were led down to the Navy Yard,
from whence it would probably have embarked in boats.

It is surmised that Colonel Forney would have been the leader. There was
no doubt entertained of his success. Before the force arrived it was
evident the fort had been reinforced, and all thought of the meditated
assault was abandoned. The men picked for this special service lay on
their arms all night in the Navy Yard.




                   BURNING OF HARPER’S FERRY ARSENAL.

                            APRIL 18, 1861.


The ordinance of secession of the State of Virginia was adopted in
secret session on the 17th of April, and the Governor of the State, John
Letcher, immediately issued orders for the seizure of the Federal posts
and property by the military of the State. A most important post to be
first secured comprised the extensive and valuable arsenal, with all its
workshops and machinery for the manufacture of arms, at Harper’s Ferry,
a place which had been rendered familiar as a household word, from its
seizure by John Brown and his party, in the autumn of 1859.

Harper’s Ferry is situated in Jefferson county, Virginia, at the
confluence of the Potomac and Shenandoah rivers, and is 173 miles
distant from Richmond, 57 from Washington, and 80 from Baltimore. The
population was about 5,000. The arsenal at this place contained 15,000
stand of arms, in addition to other military stores, then in charge of
Lieutenant R. Jones, with a detachment of U. S. Rifles, numbering 43
men. Lieutenant Jones had received advice from Washington that his post
was in imminent danger. He was directed to be prepared for any emergency
that might arise. On the 17th he received information from various
sources that an attack would be made on the night of the 18th. Early in
the evening of that day, the little garrison commenced preparations to
destroy the arsenal and its contents by fire. The windows and doors of
the buildings were then thrown open, that the flames might have a full
current of air. At nine o’clock authentic information reached Lieutenant
Jones that 2000 men were close at hand.

The men worked bravely, cutting up planks and splitting timbers into
kindling-wood, which were heaped ready for the flames. They emptied
their mattresses, filled them with powder, and carried them thus into
the buildings, that no suspicion might be excited among the people. The
arms were then placed in the best position to be destroyed by the
explosion, and the combustibles deposited in different places in the
shops, that all might be ready.

When all was completed, the fires were started in the combustibles
heaped in the carpenters’ shop. The trains leading to the powder were
ignited, and the men were led forth.

All at once a cry of fire rang through the town. The frightened
inhabitants rushed from the houses, and as Lieutenant Jones and his men
entered the gateway of the bridge, an excited crowd pursued him with
menaces and threats of vengeance. He wheeled his men into line, and
announced his determination to fire upon the pursuers if they molested
him. The people then fell back, and he escaped by the canal and took
refuge in the woods.

A quarter of an hour after, when this band of valiant men were grouped
in the darkness of the woods, the first thunders of the explosion echoed
through the hills, and flames leaped forth from the burning buildings,
illuminating the grand scenery of the place into wonderful beauty. The
water, the village, and those glorious mountain passes that surround
Harper’s Ferry with a grandeur which the whole world recognizes, were
illuminated into all their green and crystal depths. After pausing a
moment to witness the result of their own noble work, this gallant
officer and his brave men turned their faces northward, and left
Harper’s Ferry, saluted by fresh bursts of explosion, and lighted onward
by jets of flame that leaped up from the surging clouds in which the
arsenal was enveloped, till the sky glowed above them like a golden
canopy.

Leaving the scene of conflagration behind, Lieutenant Jones made a
hurried march toward Hagerstown, Maryland, wading through streams and
swamps, and reached that place at seven o’clock on the morning of the
19th. There he immediately procured means of conveyance, and started for
Chambersburg, Pennsylvania, which he reached in the afternoon in an
exhausted condition. The men were covered with mud and dirt, and were
overcome with fatigue and hunger, having eaten nothing since leaving
Harper’s Ferry. They were hospitably entertained by the inhabitants, and
departed in the afternoon train for Carlisle barracks. Lieutenant Jones
and his men received the approbation and thanks of the Government for
their judicious conduct on this occasion, and he was commissioned
Assistant Quartermaster-General, U. S. A., with the rank of Captain.

The arsenal buildings were immediately taken possession of by the rebel
authorities, and used for the purpose of making and repairing arms,
until they again came into possession of the Federal authorities.




                           THROUGH BALTIMORE.


A terrible civil war, destined to be without parallel for bitter
intenseness, was now fully revealed. The curtain that had so long
screened the enemies of the Union in their machinations against the
Government, had been raised at Fort Sumter; and in the seizure of
Harper’s Ferry arsenal, although its usefulness to them had been
seriously impaired by the true hearts and hands that applied the torch,
and rendered the darkness of night lurid with its conflagration,
desolation and ruin had already began their march, leaving their
footprints in ashes among the lovely scenes of civilized life, and
rioting amid the legendary grandeur and time-honored places of the Old
Dominion.

It needed but one act more to encircle us with the thunders of war—to
plunge the nation into an almost fathomless ocean of civil hatred and
revenge, and leave upon the pages of history the unhappy record of many
an ensanguined field. The green sward of a happy, prosperous and free
land only remained to be crimsoned with blood! The heart of some martyr
freemen needed only to be drained of its life-blood, and the stripes of
our old flag dyed a deeper crimson in the precious flood. Soon, too
soon, alas! this last fatal act was accomplished. The day after the
burning of Harper’s Ferry saw the streets of Baltimore red with sacred
blood, and a nation shuddered as the lightning spread the fatal news
from State to State.

For months threats had been whispered that Washington should be seized;
that an armed mob should revel in the capital and drive Lincoln from the
White House. These threats were not idle boastings, as the confidence,
celerity, and preparation of the insurgents proved. While the country
north of the Potomac was solacing itself with dreams of peace—while
plenty was filling every coffer to overflowing, great preparations had
been making, and that for a very long time, to secure the end they now
had in view. Sudden, unexpected, like the deep tolling of a midnight
alarm-bell, the news fell upon the country. Fear, amounting almost to
panic, seized upon the people, and when the orders were issued for the
instant assembling of troops, the rush to arms was proof positive of
this deep alarm.

As in the olden days, the sons of Massachusetts—brave, hardy, fearless
as their own sea-washed rock—rushed first to arms and responded to the
call. In less than twenty-four hours, _seventeen hundred men_ were
waiting in Boston—armed, ready and anxious to march. The order came, and
early in the morning of the nineteenth of April—a day memorable in the
history of the country, as the anniversary of the battle of
Lexington—the Sixth Regiment of Massachusetts militia, commanded by Col.
E. P. Jones, of Pepperell, and accompanied by three companies from
another regiment, attached temporarily to his command (comprising, in
all, about one thousand men), left Philadelphia for Washington, arriving
in Baltimore at ten o’clock, A. M. The same train also contained about
twelve hundred men from Philadelphia, under the command of General
Small. These were unarmed, provision having been made for their being
supplied, in this respect, on their arrival at Washington.

On the arrival of the train at the President-street depot, the
locomotives were detached, and horses substituted, occasioning much
delay, for there was an inadequate supply. A very large crowd had
gathered around, and though the reception was not one of courtesy, yet
no one would have anticipated serious trouble.

Six cars passed in safety, before the fast-increasing mob (for it could
now be called by no other name), succeeded in obstructing the track, and
thus cutting off three companies of the Massachusetts troops from their
comrades, besides General Small’s command, who had remained at the depot
of the Philadelphia road. A hasty consultation was held, and it was
determined by the officers to march the Massachusetts companies to their
destination; and the detachment, under the command of Captain
Follansbee, at once set out.

Then it was that the long-smothered fires burst out openly, and were not
to be controlled. In the streets of the Monumental City, in the face of
a little band of patriots, and in defiance of the civilized world, a
secession flag—a mutilated effigy of the stars and stripes—was flaunted
in the face of these Massachusetts men, with taunts and sneers, which
they received in grave silence. Hemmed in, surrounded, cut off from
assistance, the sons of Massachusetts were forbidden to proceed, and
boastfully taunted with their inability to march through the city. Cheer
upon cheer rang forth for the South, Jeff. Davis, Secession and South
Carolina, and mocking groans for the tried and true friends of the
Union.

But the sons of men who fought at Bunker Hill, at Monmouth, and Valley
Forge, could not be made to understand the words, “Turn back.” The blood
of patriots had been transmitted to them, and no shame could fall upon
the memories of their revolutionary fathers by their acts. They had
started for Washington—started to help form a nation’s bulwark around a
nation’s heart, and were not to be stayed by sneers or threats.

“Forward the Sixth,”—the command given and obeyed in that moment of
peril, has rendered the Sixth regiment of Massachusetts immortal!
Forward, as at Lexington, with fearless hearts, unblenching lips, and
unswerving tread, they marched on boldly, as they would have gone up to
the cannon’s mouth.

“Forward!” A bridge half destroyed, torn up, difficult of crossing, was
passed; then the air was darkened with missiles of every dangerous name
and character, showered upon their devoted heads. Stones, brick-backs,
clubs, anything savage hands could clutch, were hurled from street and
house-top, while the hissing rush of shot and ball played wildly from
musket and revolver.

Ah! it was a cruel, cold-blooded murder of innocent men—of brothers. An
act of treachery unparalleled in the history of any nation, whether
civilized or savage—a rendering of the “Monuments” of Baltimore a
mockery for all time.

Struck down by shot and stones, wounded, surrounded, hopeless of help,
these brave men yet stood their ground and even questioned _whether it
would be right to retaliate_. A question without a parallel and proving
the pure gold of those brave hearts.

[Illustration:

  ATTACK ON THE MASSACHUSETTS SIXTH IN BALTIMORE.
]

But the time when forbearance ceases to be a virtue, came at last to
these heroic men—these tender-hearted, christianized soldiers; when
self-preservation, the sternly just primal law of our nature commanded
them to defend themselves. With firm front, but with sad hearts they
prepared to execute the command, and many a form that would not have
trembled amid the shock of battle, trembled now as his musket rang the
death peal.

Unable to stand the charge, to face the deadly music their own cowardly
hearts had awakened—afraid to listen to the awful tumult of battle, the
mob broke and sought also to arm themselves. Save from private sources,
stores, gunshops and the like, they failed in securing any, for the
armories had been well protected in anticipation of this possible event.
An incessant storm of stones, however, answered every musket shot, and
while the fearless “Sixth” still pressed on, more than one of their
number fell by the way, and was borne off helpless and wounded, by the
police.

The fight was a running one, terrific in its results, as it was rapid in
its execution, and though the soldiers at length succeeded in reaching
the depot, with the loss of only two killed and nine wounded; while
their assailants’ loss was nine killed and eight severely wounded, yet
the streets were stained with American blood, drawn by American hands.
The pavement stones were red with the life-tide of brothers. Stained
indelibly, for though the marks have long since been effaced by the pure
rains of a merciful heaven, and the ceaseless tramp of busy feet, yet
they are graven on the records of the age with a pen of fire, carving
deeper than steel, and more lasting than marble!

The unarmed Pennsylvania troops, taking the alarm, were sent back,
though not without injury from the infuriated mob.

The band of the glorious Sixth, consisting of twenty-four persons,
together with their musical instruments, occupied a car by themselves
from Philadelphia to Baltimore. By some accident the musicians’ car got
switched off at the Canton depot, so that, instead of being the first,
it was left in the rear of all the others, and after the attack had been
made by the mob upon the soldiers, they came upon the car in which the
band was still sitting, wholly unarmed, and incapable of making any
defence. The infuriated demons approached them, howling and yelling, and
poured in upon them a shower of stones, broken iron, and other missiles;
wounding some severely, and demolishing their instruments. Some of the
miscreants jumped upon the roof of the car, and, with a bar of iron,
beat a hole through it, while others were calling for powder to blow
them all up in a heap.

Finding that it would be sure destruction to remain longer in the car,
the poor fellows jumped out to meet their fiendish assailants hand to
hand. They were saluted with a shower of stones, but took to their
heels, fighting their way through the crowd, and running at random,
without knowing in what direction to go for assistance or shelter.

As they were hurrying along, a rough-looking man suddenly jumped in
front of their leader, and exclaimed: “This way, boys! this way!”

It was the first friendly voice they had heard since entering Baltimore;
they stopped to ask no questions, but followed their guide, who took
them up a narrow court, where they found an open door, into which they
rushed, being met inside by a powerful-looking woman, who grasped each
one by the hand, and directed them upstairs. The last of their band was
knocked senseless just as he was entering the door, by a stone, which
struck him on the head; but the woman who had welcomed them, immediately
caught up their fallen comrade, and carried him in her arms up the
stairs.

“You are perfectly safe here, boys,” said the brave woman, who directly
proceeded to wash and bind up their wounds.

After having done this, she procured them food, and then told them to
strip off their uniforms and put on the clothes she had brought them, a
motley assortment of baize jackets, ragged coats, and old trowsers. Thus
equipped, they were enabled to go out in search of their companions,
without danger of attack from the mob, which had given them so rough a
reception.

They then learned the particulars of the attack upon the soldiers, and
of their escape, and saw lying at the station the two men who had been
killed, and the others who had been wounded. On going back to the house
where they had been so humanely treated, they found that their clothes
had been carefully tied up, and with their battered instruments, had
been sent to the depot of the Philadelphia railroad, where they were
advised to go themselves. They did not long hesitate, but started in the
next train, and arrived at Philadelphia just in time to meet the Eighth
regiment of Massachusetts Volunteers.

Contrast this generous act with that of an old gray-haired man, aged
more than sixty-five years, who saw one of the Massachusetts soldiers in
the act of levelling his musket, when he rushed in his shirt sleeves
from his shop, disarmed the man by main force, and killed him with the
bayonet—and you have some idea of the conflicting elements which
composed the Baltimore riot.

Increasing by what it had fed on, the lawless spirit ran still more
high; its black waves rolled and surged, and no power could be found
strong enough to control them. The demon spirit that ran riot during the
days of Robespierre, and the fiendish hours of the “Reign of Terror,”
appeared in the streets of Baltimore, and foul lips sang rebellious
songs. Secession and murder mingling together in rude discord.

The rulers were impotent to check the storm, or control the whirlwind.
The people were for the time masters—the authorities helpless.

On this memorable 19th of April, the writer of these pages was on her
way from Washington to New York. The train in which she travelled was
loaded down with persons going northward, for Washington was not
considered a safe place to sojourn in that week, especially for ladies.

About ten miles from Baltimore we met the train which bore the Sixth
Massachusetts regiment from the scene of its late encounter. Both trains
slackened speed, and instantly it flew like wildfire along the cars that
there had been riot and bloodshed in Baltimore, and the brave fellows we
had passed had been attacked in their passage through the town. The news
was received with great excitement, that grew more and more intense
until our engine thundered into the depot. The fighting was over, but a
mob of morose and cruel-looking men, with a few black women and
children, still hung around the building, and we passed out through a
lane of scowling faces.

The horse railroad had been torn up and so blockaded that there was no
hopes of reaching the Philadelphia cars by that way. With difficulty we
procured a carriage and were drawn over the scene of conflict. The
railroad was almost obliterated; piles of lumber, fifteen feet high,
were heaped upon it. Immense anchors lay across it, forming an iron
barricade. Every window along the line was crowded with eager, scared
faces, mostly black, and those that were white, evidently of the lowest
order.

It became impossible to pass along the railroad, for it was completely
blocked up. We turned into a side street, and at last took our places in
the Philadelphia train. Here two or three men in uniform entered the
cars, and after the train started they were seen talking earnestly with
the conductor near our seat. It seemed that the Pennsylvania regiment
had been scattered, and while a train had returned toward Philadelphia
with the larger portion of the men, some twenty-five or thirty were
grouped on the wayside, some miles from the city, hoping that our train
would take them in.

The conductor was inexorable. His orders were to proceed direct—besides,
he had no room, every seat was crowded. This was true; but all the
gentlemen, among whom was Senator Wilkinson, of Minnesota, and several
ladies that sat within hearing, pleaded that the men should be taken in,
and all offered to surrender their own seats. But it was of no avail—the
conductor had his orders.

A few minutes after the officers had retreated we passed a platform on
the wayside on which these unlucky soldiers were grouped, in anxious
expectation that the train would stop, but it went steadily by, leaving
the most disappointed and gloomy faces behind that one often looks upon.

We afterwards learned that these poor fellows wandered around the
country for three days, and many of them came back to Philadelphia on
foot.

If they were sad at being left, those in the cars were both sorrowful
and indignant that they had not been taken up. It seemed to them an act
of wanton cruelty; and one of the company, at least, has not yet been
able to change her opinion on the subject.

At Wilmington we passed the town in which were the companions of these
deserted men. Their train had paused in the town, which we found one
blaze of excitement. As the news spread, cheer after cheer arose for the
stars and stripes, the soldiers, the government, and everything else
around which a patriotic cry could centre, rang up from the streets. The
people were fairly wild when they saw that the soldiers were driven
back.

In every town and at every depot this wild spirit of indignation
increased as we advanced. Philadelphia was full of armed men; regiments
were rushing to the arsenals, groups of men talked eagerly in the
streets—martial music sounded near the Continental Hotel at intervals
all night. The city was one scene of wild commotion. In the morning the
Seventh New York regiment came in. The day before they had left the
Empire City one blaze of star-spangled flags and in a tumult of
patriotic enthusiasm. That morning they were hailed in Philadelphia with
like spirit. Expecting to march through Baltimore, they panted for an
opportunity of avenging the noble men who had fallen there. The citizens
met them with generous hospitality, and their passage through
Philadelphia was an ovation.

But their indignation towards the Baltimorians was not to be appeased by
fighting their own way through that city. Orders reached them to advance
toward Washington through Annapolis, and they obeyed, much against the
general inclination of the regiment.

I have said that the authorities in Baltimore were powerless; they had
no means of learning how far the secession spirit had spread through the
city. It is true the riot of the 19th had been ostensibly the action of
a low mob, but how far the same spirit extended among the people no one
could guess.

On the 20th the mob became more and more belligerent. It assembled at
Canton, fired a pistol at the engineer of the Philadelphia train when it
came in, and forcing the passengers to leave the cars, rushed in
themselves and compelled the engineer to take them back to Gunpowder
bridge. There the train was stopped while the mob set fire to the draw
bridge, then returned to Bush river bridge, burned the draw there, and
finished their raid by burning Canton bridge.

While this was going on outside the city, materials for fresh commotion
were gathering in the streets.

All through the day the accessions from the country were coming in.
Sometimes a squad of infantry, sometimes a troop of horse, and once a
small park of artillery. It was nothing extraordinary to see a “solitary
horseman” riding in from the country, with shot-gun, powder-horn and
flask. Some came with provender lashed to the saddle, prepared to picket
off for the night. Boys accompanied their fathers, accoutred apparently
with the sword and holster-pistols that had done service a century ago.
There appeared strange contrasts between the stern, solemn bearing of
the father, and the buoyant, excited, enthusiastic expressions of the
boy’s face, eloquent with devotion and patriotism; for mistaken and
wrong, they were not the less actuated by the most unselfish spirit of
loyalty. They hardly knew, any of them, for what they had so suddenly
came to Baltimore. They had a vague idea, only, that Maryland had been
invaded, and that it was the solemn duty of her sons to protect their
soil from the encroachments of a hostile force.

In the streets of the lower part of the city, were gathered immense
crowds among whom discussions and the high pitch of excitement which
discussion engenders, grew clamorous. The mob—for Baltimore street was
one vast mob—was surging to and fro, uncertain in what direction to
move, and apparently without any special purpose. Many had small
secession cards pinned on their coat collars, and not a few were armed
with guns, pistols and knives, of which they made the most display.

Thus the day ended and the night came on. During the darkness the whole
city seemed lying in wait for the foe. Every moment the mob expected the
descent of some Federal regiment upon them, and the thirst for strife
had grown so fierce that terrible bloodshed must have followed if the
troops from Philadelphia or Harrisburg had attempted to pass through
Baltimore then.

On Sunday, April 21, the city was in a state of unparalleled excitement.
Private citizens openly carried arms in the streets. Along the line of
the railroad almost every house was supplied with muskets or revolvers
and missiles, in some instances even with small cannon. Volunteers were
enlisting rapidly, and the streets became more and more crowded.
Abundance of arms had sprung to light, as if by magic, in rebellious
hands. Troops were continually arriving and placing themselves in
readiness for action.

A great crowd was constantly surging around the telegraph office,
waiting anxiously for news. The earnest inquiry was as to the
whereabouts of the New York troops—the most frequent topic, the probable
results of an attempt on the part of the Seventh regiment to force a
passage through Baltimore. All agreed that the force could never go
through—all agreed that it would make the attempt if ordered to do so,
and no one seemed to entertain a doubt that it would leave a winrow of
dead bodies from the ranks of those who assailed it in the streets
through which it might attempt to pass.

As the wires of the telegraph leading to New York had been cut, there
was no news to be had for the crowd from that direction.

The police force were entirely in sympathy with the secessionists, and
indisposed to act against the mob. Marshal Kane and the Commissioners
made no concealment of their proclivities for the secession movement.

Amid this tumult the Mayor of Baltimore and a committee of citizens
started for Washington. Their object was to influence the President
against forwarding troops through the city in its present agitated
state. But the knowledge of his departure did nothing toward allaying
the excitement.

About eight o’clock, the streets began again to be crowded. The barrooms
and public resorts were closed, that the incentive to precipitate action
might not be too readily accessible. Nevertheless there was much
excitement, and among the crowd were many men from the country, who
carried shot and duck guns, and old-fashioned horse-pistols, such as the
“Maryland line” might have carried from the first to the present war.
The best weapons appeared to be in the hands of young men—boys of
eighteen—with the physique, dress and style of deportment cultivated by
the “Dead Rabbits” of New York.

About ten o’clock, a cry was raised that 3,000 Pennsylvania troops were
at the Calvert street depot of the Pennsylvania railroad, and were about
to take up their line of march through the city. It was said that the
3,000 were at Pikesville, about fifteen miles from the city, and were
going to fight their way around the city. The crowd were not disposed to
interfere with a movement that required a preliminary tramp of fifteen
miles through a heavy sand. But the city authorities, however, rapidly
organized and armed some three or four companies and sent them towards
Pikesville. Ten of the Adams’ Express wagons passed up Baltimore street,
loaded with armed men. In one or two there were a number of mattresses,
as if wounded men were anticipated. A company of cavalry also started
for Pikesville to sustain the infantry that had been expressed. Almost
before the last of the expedition had left the city limits, word was
telegraphed to Marshal Kane by Mayor Brown from Washington, that the
government had ordered the Pennsylvania troops back to Harrisburgh, from
the point they had been expected to move on to Baltimore. It seemed
incredible, but, of course, satisfactory to the belligerents.

The moment it was known that the government had abandoned the intention
of forcing troops through Baltimore, this intense commotion settled into
comparative calm, but the city was forced to feel the effect of its own
folly. The regular passenger trains north had been stopped.

Many business men have been utterly ruined by the extraordinary position
into which the city was plunged through the action of the mob. Capital
has been swept away, and commercial advantages sacrificed, that no time
or enterprise can replace. Those engaged in trade, have no part in these
troubles except to suffer. The mob had them in complete subjection, and
a stain has been cast on the city which no time can efface. Yet the
whole of this attack was doubtless the work of those classes who form
the bane and dregs of society, in every great city; after events have
proved that it was the uprising of a lawless mob, not the expression of
a people. But the Mayor of the city and the Governor of the State were
for a few days in which these revolters triumphed alike powerless. In
this strait they notified the authorities in Washington that troops
could not be passed through that city without bloodshed.

The difficulties and dangers of the 19th of April were speedily removed
by President Lincoln’s determination to march troops intended for
Washington by another route, backed by the determination and efficiency
of the government and by the supplies which were sent to the aid of
loyal men of the city and State, and thereby Maryland has been saved
from anarchy, desolation and ruin. The work of impious hands was
stayed—a star preserved to our banner, and the right vindicated without
unnecessary loss of life! But nothing save great caution and forbearance
almost unparalleled in civil wars, rescued Baltimore from destruction.

When the news of the disaster to the brave Massachusetts regiment
reached the old Bay State, a feeling of profound sorrow and deep
indignation seized upon the people. Troops gathered to the rescue in
battalions, armed men arose at every point, and every railroad verging
toward Washington became a great military highway. Not only
Massachusetts, but all New England looked upon the outrage with generous
indignation, as if each State had seen its own sons stricken down. It
seemed to be a strife of patriotism which should get its men first to
the field. Directly after the Massachusetts troops, the first regiment
of Rhode Island Volunteers passed through New York, on their way to the
South. Governor Sprague, who had magnanimously contributed one hundred
thousand dollars to the cause, accompanied these troops, as
commander-in-chief of the Rhode Island forces. His staff consisted of
Colonels Frieze, Goddard, Arnold, and Captain A. W. Chapin, Assistant
Adjutant-General. And this was followed by a continued rush of armed men
till all the great thoroughfares leading to the capital bristled with
steel, and reverberated with the tramp of soldiery.

Governor Andrews sent to Maryland requesting that the martyred soldiers
should be reverently sent back to Massachusetts, that the State might
give them honored burial. This request was complied with, Governor Hicks
responding in a delicate and sympathetic manner, and not only
Massachusetts but a whole nation awarded them the glory of first dying
for a country that will never forget them. The names of these men were,
Sumner H. Needham, of Lawrence; Addison O. Whitney, of Lowell City
Guards; and Luther C. Ladd, Lowell City Guards.




                 MILITARY OCCUPATION OF ANNAPOLIS, Md.

                            APRIL 21, 1861.


On the 18th of April, the Eighth Massachusetts regiment, under the
command of General Butler, left Boston for Washington. On arriving at
Philadelphia, he ascertained that all communication with Washington by
the ordinary line of travel through Baltimore had been cut off, and
telegraphic operations suspended. He proceeded to the Susquehanna river,
and at Perryville seized the immense ferry-boat “Maryland,” belonging to
the railroad company, and steamed with his regiment for Annapolis.
Through the supposed treachery of the pilot, the boat was grounded on
the bar before that place, and they were detained over night. The
arrival of troops at this point proved of vital importance. A conspiracy
had been formed by a band of secessionists to seize the old frigate
Constitution, which lay moored at the wharf of the Naval Academy at that
place, being in service as a school for the cadets. Captain Devereux,
with his company, was ordered to take possession of the noble old craft,
which was promptly done, and the vessel towed to a safe distance from
the landing. Governor Hicks, of Maryland, hearing of their arrival, sent
a protest against troops being landed at that place.

On Monday, the 22d, the troops landed at the Naval Academy, followed by
the New York Seventh regiment, which had just arrived on board the
steamer Boston, from Philadelphia, by the help of which vessel the
Maryland was enabled to get off the bar.

In order to insure the ready transportation of troops and provisions
which were to follow him by the same route, General Butler seized
several vessels in the neighborhood, and promptly entered them into the
United States service. Meantime a Pennsylvania regiment had arrived at
Havre de Grace, and, anticipating the speedy accession of reinforcements
from New York by water, three companies of the Eighth Massachusetts were
detached as an engineer corps to repair the road to the Annapolis and
Elk Ridge Railroad, of which General Butler had taken military
possession.

The Seventy-first New York and other regiments having arrived during the
night of April 23d, early on the following morning the Seventh regiment,
from New York, took up its line of march on the track to Washington
Junction. A member of this regiment, young O’Brien the poet, pays a
merited tribute to the brave men who preceded them:

On the morning of the 22d we were in sight of Annapolis, off which the
Constitution was lying, and there found the Eighth regiment of
Massachusetts volunteers on board the Maryland. They were aground,
owing, it is supposed, to the treachery of the captain, whom they put in
irons and wanted to hang. I regret to say that they did not do it.
During the greater portion of that forenoon we were occupied in trying
to get the Maryland off the sand-bar on which she was grounded. From our
decks we could see the men in file trying to rock her, so as to
facilitate our tugging. These men were without water and without food,
were well-conducted and uncomplaining, and behaved in all respects like
heroes. They were under the command of Colonel Butler, and I regret that
that gentleman did not care more for the comforts of men whose
subsequent pluck proved that nothing was too good for them.

On the afternoon of the 22d we landed at the Annapolis dock, after
having spent hours in trying to relieve the Maryland. For the first time
in his life your correspondent was put to work to roll flour-barrels. He
was entrusted with the honorable and onerous duty of transporting stores
from the steamer to the dock. Later still he descended to the position
of mess servant, when, in company with gentlemen well known in Broadway
for immaculate kids, he had the honor of attending on his company with
buckets of cooked meat and crackers—the only difference between him and
Co. and the ordinary waiter being, that the former were civil.

We were quartered in the buildings belonging to the Naval School at
Annapolis. I had a bunking-place in what is there called a fort, which
is a rickety structure that a lucifer match would set on fire, but
furnished with imposing guns. I suppose it was merely built to practice
the cadets, because as a defence it is worthless. The same evening boats
were sent off from the yard, and towards nightfall the Massachusetts men
landed, fagged, hungry, thirsty, but indomitable.

The two days that we remained at Annapolis were welcome. We had been
without a fair night’s sleep since we left New York, and even the hard
quarters we had there were a luxury compared to the dirty decks of the
Boston. Besides, there were natural attractions. The grounds are very
prettily laid out, and in the course of my experience I never saw a
handsomer or better bred set of young men than the cadets. Twenty had
left the school owing to political convictions. The remainder are sound
Union fellows, eager to prove their devotion to the flag. After spending
a delightful time in the Navy School, resting and amusing ourselves, our
repose was disturbed at 9 P. M., April 23, by rockets being thrown up in
the bay. The men were scattered all over the grounds; some in bed,
others walking or smoking, all more or less undressed. The rockets being
of a suspicious character, it was conjectured that a Southern fleet was
outside, and our drummer beat the rollcall to arms. From the stroke of
the drum until the time that every man, fully equipped and in fighting
order, was in the ranks, was exactly, by watch, _seven minutes_. The
alarm, however, proved to be false, the vessels in the offing proving to
be laden with the Seventy-first and other New York regiments; so that,
after an unpremeditated trial of our readiness for action, we were
permitted to retire to our couches, which means, permit me to say, a
blanket on the floor, with a military overcoat over you, and a nasal
concert all around you, that, in noise and number, outvies Musard’s
_concerts monstres_.

On the morning of the 24th of April we started on what afterwards proved
to be one of the hardest marches on record. The secessionists of
Annapolis and the surrounding districts had threatened to cut us off in
our march, and even went so far as to say that they would attack our
quarters. The dawn saw us up. Knapsacks, with our blankets and overcoats
strapped on them, were piled on the green. A brief and insufficient
breakfast was taken, our canteens filled with vinegar and water,
cartridges distributed to each man, and after mustering and loading, we
started on our first march through a hostile country.

General Scott has stated, as I have been informed, that the march that
we performed from Annapolis to the Junction is one of the most
remarkable on record. I know that I felt it the most fatiguing, and some
of our officers have told me that it was the most perilous. We marched
the first eight miles under a burning sun, in heavy marching order, in
less than three hours; and it is well known that, placing all elementary
considerations out of the way, marching on a railroad track is the most
harassing. We started at about 8 o’clock, A. M., and for the first time
saw the town of Annapolis, which, without any disrespect to that place,
I may say looked very much as if some celestial schoolboy, with a box of
toys under his arm, had dropped a few houses and men as he was going
home from school, and that the accidental settlement was called
Annapolis. Through the town we marched, the people unsympathizing, but
afraid. They saw the Seventh for the first time, and for the first time
they realized the men that they had threatened.

The tracks had been torn up between Annapolis and the Junction, and here
it was that the wonderful qualities of the Massachusetts Eighth regiment
came out. The locomotives had been taken to pieces by the inhabitants,
in order to prevent our travel. In steps a Massachusetts volunteer,
looks at the piece-meal engine, takes up a flange, and says coolly, “I
made this engine, and I can put it together again.” Engineers were
wanted when the engine was ready. Nineteen stepped out of the ranks. The
rails were torn up. Practical railroad makers out of the regiment laid
them again, and all this, mind you, without care or food. These brave
boys, I say, were starving while they were doing this good work. As we
marched along the track that they had laid, they greeted us with ranks
of smiling but hungry faces. One boy told me, with a laugh on his young
lips, that he had not eaten anything for thirty hours. There was not,
thank God, a haversack in our regiment that was not emptied into the
hands of these ill-treated heroes, nor a flask that was not at their
disposal.

Our march lay through an arid, sandy, tobacco-growing country. The sun
poured on our heads like hot lava. The Sixth and Second companies were
sent on for skirmishing duty, under the command of Captains Clarke and
Nevers, the latter commanding as senior officer. A car, on which was
placed a howitzer, loaded with grape and canister, headed the column,
manned by the engineer and artillery corps, commanded by Lieutenant
Bunting. This was the rallying point of the skirmishing party, on which,
in case of difficulty, they could fall back. In the centre of the column
came the cars, laden with medical stores, and bearing our sick and
wounded, while the extreme rear was brought up with a second howitzer,
loaded also with grape and canister. The engineer corps, of course, had
to do the forwarding work. New York dandies, sir—but they built bridges,
laid rails, and headed the regiment through. After marching about eight
miles, during which time several men caved in from exhaustion, and one
young gentleman was sunstruck, and sent back to New York, we halted, and
instantly, with the divine instinct which characterizes the hungry
soldier, proceeded to forage. The worst of it was, there was no foraging
to be done. The only house within reach was inhabited by a lethargic
person, who, like most Southern men, had no idea of gaining money by
labor. We offered him extravagant prices to get us fresh water, and it
was with the utmost reluctance that we could get him to obtain us a few
pailfuls. Over the mantel-piece of his miserable shanty I saw—a curious
coincidence—the portrait of Colonel Duryea, of our regiment.

After a brief rest of about an hour, we again commenced our march; a
march which lasted until the next morning—a march than which in history,
nothing but those marches in which defeated troops have fled from the
enemy, can equal. Our Colonel, it seems, determined to march by
railroad, in preference to the common road, inasmuch as he had obtained
such secret information as led him to suppose that we were waited for on
the latter route. Events justified his judgment. There were cavalry
troops posted in defiles to cut us off. They could not have done it, of
course, but they could have harassed us severely. As we went along the
railroad we threw out skirmishing parties from the Second and Sixth
companies, to keep the road clear. I know not if I can describe that
night’s march. I have dim recollections of deep cuts through which we
passed, gloomy and treacherous-looking, with the moon shining full on
our muskets, while the banks were wrapped in shade, and each moment
expecting to see the flash and hear the crack of the rifle of the
Southern guerilla. The tree frogs and lizards made a mournful music as
we passed. The soil on which we travelled was soft and heavy. The
sleepers, lying at intervals across the track, made the march terribly
fatiguing. On all sides dark, lonely pine woods stretched away, and high
over the hooting of owls, or the plaintive petition of the
whip-poor-will, rose the bass commands of “Halt! Forward, march!”—and
when we came to any ticklish spot, the word would run from the head of
the column along the lines, “Holes,” “Bridge—pass it along,” &c.

As the night wore on, the monotony of the march became oppressive. Owing
to our having to explore every inch of the way, we did not make more
than a mile or a mile and a half an hour. We ran out of stimulants, and
almost out of water. Most of us had not slept for four nights, and as
the night advanced our march was almost a stagger. This was not so much
fatigue as want of excitement. Our fellows were spoiling for a light,
and when a dropping shot was heard in the distance, it was wonderful to
see how the languid legs straightened, and the column braced itself for
action. If we had had even the smallest kind of a skirmish, the men
would have been able to walk to Washington. As it was, we went sleepily
on. I myself fell asleep, walking in the ranks. Numbers, I find,
followed my example; but never before was there shown such indomitable
pluck and perseverance as the Seventh showed in that march of twenty
miles. The country that we passed through seemed to have been entirely
deserted. The inhabitants, who were going to kill us when they thought
we daren’t come through, now vamosed their respective ranches, and we
saw them not. Houses were empty. The population retired into the
interior, burying their money, and carrying their families along with
them. They, it seems, were under the impression that we came to ravage
and pillage, and they fled, as the Gauls must have fled, when Attila and
his Huns came down on them from the North. As we did at Annapolis, we
did in Maryland State. We left an impression that cannot be forgotten.
Everything was paid for. No discourtesy was offered to any inhabitant,
and the sobriety of the regiment should be an example to others. Nothing
could have been more effective or energetic than the movements of the
Engineer Corps, to whom we were indebted for the rebuilding of a bridge
in an incredibly short space of time.

The secret of this forced march, as well as our unexpected descent on
Annapolis, was the result of Colonel Lefferts’ judgment, which has since
been sustained by events. Finding that the line along the Potomac was
closed, and the route to Washington, by Baltimore, equally
impracticable, he came to the conclusion that Annapolis, commanding, as
it did, the route to the Capital, must of necessity be made the basis of
military operations. It was important to the government to have a free
channel through which to transport troops, and this post presented the
readiest means. The fact that since then all the Northern troops have
passed through the line that we thus opened, is a sufficient comment on
the admirable judgment that decided on the movement. It secured the
integrity of the regiment, and saved lives, the loss of which would have
plunged New York into mourning. Too much importance cannot be attached
to this strategy. To it the Seventh regiment is indebted for being here
at present, intact and sound.

On Thursday, April 24, this regiment reached Washington, having taken
the cars at the junction. They were followed directly by their noble
comrades of the march, the Massachusetts Eighth, and immediately moved
into quarters.

While the troops under Butler and Lefferts were lying at Annapolis,
great anxiety was felt regarding them at Washington. The lamented Lander
was then at the capital, pleading for the privilege of raising a
regiment for the defence of the government, but, for some inexplicable
cause, General Scott had not yet accepted his services. With Baltimore
in open revolt, and Annapolis doubtful in its loyalty, this anxiety
about the troops become so urgent, that Lander was sent forward to
Annapolis, with general directions to aid the troops with all his
ability, and to direct Colonel Butler not to land his men until the
kindly feeling of the citizens of Annapolis was ascertained.

Lander started on the mission, as he undertook everything, with heart
and soul. He rode from Washington to Annapolis on horseback, without
stopping for darkness, or any other cause save the necessary care of his
horse, and reached Annapolis an hour after the troops had landed.
Bringing his experience, as a frontiersman, who had seen hard service
against hostile Indians on the plains, to bear on the position, Lander
gave Colonel Butler such aid and advice as assisted greatly in bringing
the soldiers forward with less danger and suffering than might otherwise
have arisen during their march to the junction.




                               MARYLAND.


The attack by an armed mob upon the Massachusetts regiment had called
the attention of the entire country to the State of Maryland, and her
future course was the subject of deep feeling. Indirectly, Washington
was, of course, menaced by her movements, and it became a matter of
vital importance that she should be retained in the Union and restored
to her fidelity. Not here alone were keen eyes watching her future.
England and France, in their eager thirst for dominion and their
jealousy of America and her liberal institutions, scrutinized every
action, with reference to their own future course. Second only to
Washington, therefore, for the time, became the “Monumental City.”

[Illustration: UNION HEROES BURNSIDE. HEINTZELMAN. BUTLER. WOOL.
McCALL.]

From the 19th of April, the day when the banner of the Massachusetts
Sixth was baptized in blood, until the 14th of June, all was suspense,
and those who still retained their fealty were reluctant to express
their loyalty from fear of personal violence. Then an election was held
for members of Congress, and every district, save one, returned decisive
majorities for unconditional Union men. The majority of the Legislature
were unreserved in their expressions of disunion, and were secretly, if
not openly, urging on the State to revolt. As early as December, 1860,
Governor Hicks had been solicited to call a Convention for that purpose,
and emissaries of the rebel government had labored with untiring zeal to
spread secession sentiments among the people. The Governor, knowing the
heart of the masses to be true, refused, and his decision came like a
thunder-clap upon the Southern partizans who hoped to find him a pliant
tool in their hands.

The proclamation of the President, of the 15th April, was tortured into
a means of exciting popular clamor, and every effort was made to fan the
fires of secession, until they should burst forth in fierce flame.
Meetings were held for that purpose, and every possible means resorted
to for its accomplishment. While very many of the wealthy and commercial
classes of Maryland, and particularly of Baltimore, were in favor of
disunion, eminent and influential citizens, some of whom were among the
most distinguished public men of the State, and whose names are
inseparably connected with its civil and political history, were
committed irrevocably to the support of the government. In this cause
the industrial classes—the working-men and the farmers—were true to the
principles they had always professed. Whatever political parties they
had sympathized with, it had been ever on the broad basis of the Union
and the Constitution.

An illustration of this was given on the 18th of April, the day previous
to the attack on the Massachusetts regiment. A party of secessionists
had raised a rebel flag in the suburbs of Baltimore, and had a cannon
with which they saluted it, but a vast crowd of working-men from the
neighboring foundries assembled, tore down the flag, and threw the
cannon into the river. His Excellency, Thomas H. Hicks, Governor; John
P. Kennedy, Secretary of State under President Fillmore; Reverdy
Johnson, John R. Kenley, ex-Governor Francis Thomas, Hon. Henry Winter
Davis, Edwin H. Webster, Alexander Evans, and many others boldly stepped
forward, and planted themselves in the foreground, to resist the tide of
dishonesty, passion, and frenzy, into which the State was plunged by the
conspirators. Five thousand citizens of Baltimore addressed a letter to
Governor Hicks, on January 2d, approving his course in refusing to call
the Legislature together to authorize a Convention, and public meetings
were held throughout the State for the same purpose. Notwithstanding
this great demonstration of popular opinion, the secessionists were
resolved upon making the attempt; and, though foiled in their measures,
seized the opportunity afforded by the passage of Northern troops
through Baltimore, to enkindle the flames of civil war, hoping, in the
confusion, to urge their schemes to a fulfilment.

The pressure upon the Governor after this event became almost
insupportable. All the combined influences of political, social and
commercial classes were brought to bear upon him, and the wild
denunciations and contemptuous and bitter invective and threats hurled
incessantly upon Baltimore and Maryland by a large portion of the
northern press were persistently used to press the Executive to the
commission of the fatal act. Thus urged on all sides, he was compelled,
in deference to the sudden and violent appeals of the people, to request
the government to send no more troops through Maryland. The proclamation
of the President of the 15th of April, and the call for troops, was
represented by the secessionists of Maryland, as in other States, as an
attempt to “coerce,” “invade” and “subjugate” the Southern States. They
used this appeal with great effect on the popular mind, and the passions
of the people were so inflammable, that many whose convictions were
utterly opposed to the disunion measures were determined to resent this
attempt to “subdue” them. On the 17th of April an excited disunion
meeting had been held in Baltimore, and great efforts were made to
commit the citizens to the secession movement. On the following day
Governor Hicks and his Honor George Wm. Brown, Mayor of Baltimore,
issued proclamations calling upon all citizens to keep the peace. The
Governor assured the people that no troops should be sent from Maryland,
except to defend the national capital. The arrival of Massachusetts
troops and the fatal occurrences of the 19th, caused an almost entire
cessation of business, and all commerce was suddenly prostrated.

The secessionists were determined to render it impracticable for any
more troops to reach Washington, and for this purpose destroyed the
bridges and a considerable portion of the tracks of several railroads
both north and south of Baltimore.

The Pennsylvania Northern, Philadelphia, Annapolis Junction, and
Baltimore and Ohio roads suffered extensively; and in consequence of
these lawless proceedings, the greatest difficulty was apprehended in
getting troops to Washington in time to protect the capital from the
threatened attack.

On the 21st the government announced that it took possession of the
Philadelphia and Baltimore railway as a military road. During the
temporary delay and obstruction to the travel, it was almost impossible
for travellers to pass either way. Many were molested in Baltimore; some
were placed in confinement under false charges by the secessionists, and
all were compelled to pay exorbitant prices and resort to the rudest
means of conveyance to pursue their journeys, when permitted so to do.
On the 22d the Mayor and Police Board of Baltimore laid an embargo on
provisions and necessary supplies, as the interruption to transportation
threatened a deficiency of food.

The Governor, under these extraordinary circumstances, called a special
session of the Legislature, which assembled at Frederick, on the 26th of
the month, the capital, Annapolis, being then in possession of General
Butler, who threatened to arrest the whole body if an ordinance of
secession were passed. The secession members of the Legislature then
attempted to procure the organization of a Board of Safety, which should
have discretionary power during the crisis, but public meetings were
immediately called, which were loud in their denunciations of this
covert transfer of the State to its enemies, and it was abandoned.
Resolutions protesting against the war, and recommending the President
to desist, and resort to arbitration, were adopted, and a committee
appointed to visit the President and induce him to promise that no more
troops should be passed through Maryland. The President replied that the
public necessity must govern him, and that he would consult the wishes
of the people to the utmost extent that the national welfare would
permit.

The Legislature, after the report of the Committee had been submitted,
on May 6, discussed the questions at issue, and on the 10th adopted a
preamble and resolution, declaring Maryland sympathized “with the South
in the struggle for their rights, solemnly protests against this action,
and will take no part in it, denouncing the military occupancy of the
State, and transportation of troops, and imploring the President, in the
name of God, to cease this unholy war.”

The reorganization of the military departments for the war was
progressing with all possible dispatch. The Department of Washington was
assigned to Colonel Joseph K. F. Mansfield, the Department of Annapolis
to Major-General Butler, and that of Pennsylvania to Major General
Robert Patterson.

On the 5th of May, General Butler took possession of the junction of the
Baltimore and Washington and Baltimore and Ohio railroads, at the Relay
House, nine miles south of Baltimore. Four days afterwards a body of
United States troops landed at Locust Point in that city, and were
conveyed by the cars through it without interruption. The Marshal of the
city, John K. Kane, was known to be deeply implicated in the work of
rebellion, and he was arrested and search was made at the police
headquarters for concealed arms and supplies.

The people of Maryland held views which her disloyal legislators had
misrepresented. On the 14th of May, a meeting was held at East
Baltimore, at which strong Union resolutions were adopted, pledging
“lives, fortunes, and sacred honor,” to its defence, declaring the right
of the government to convey troops through the State, and their own
right and duty to aid them in the work.

General Butler the same day occupied Federal Hill, at Baltimore, and
issued a proclamation which was scattered in immense numbers among the
people, and contributed in a high degree to the restoration of
confidence and harmony among all classes. An important step was also
taken by Governor Hicks, who, on the same day issued a proclamation
calling for the State quota of four regiments of volunteers for three
months, to sustain the government and to protect the capital. General
Butler had seized various military stores intended for the rebels, and
also took possession of arms and powder belonging to loyal parties, to
prevent their being removed by enemies to the government.

Brigadier-General Butler, having been appointed Major-General, and
placed in command of the military Department of Virginia, North Carolina
and Tennessee, a most important position, was transferred to Fortress
Monroe, and was succeeded by General Cadwallader on the 20th. Fort
McHenry was reinforced, and put into the most effective condition for
immediate service, and the conspirators of Baltimore were restrained
from further disorders by the apprehension that any attempt at
insurrection would be the signal for a bombardment of the city. After
Cadwallader came into command, several arrests of prominent persons had
been made. Among these was Mr. John Merryman, who applied to
Chief-Justice Taney for a writ of _habeas corpus_. This was granted; and
General Cadwallader, in answer, said that the prisoner had been arrested
on charge of various acts of treason—of holding a command in a company
having in possession arms belonging to the United States, and of avowing
his purpose of armed hostility to the Government of the United States.
In such cases General Cadwallader said he was authorized by the
President to suspend the _habeas corpus_ act; he therefore requested
Judge Taney to suspend further action until instructions could be had
from the President.

Judge Taney thereupon issued a writ of attachment against General
Cadwallader for contempt of court. The Marshal proceeded to Fort McHenry
to execute the writ, but was refused admission. Judge Taney urged that
the President had no authority to suspend the act of _habeas corpus_, or
to authorize others to do so. An elaborate opinion to that effect was
prepared by the Judge and has since been published.

A sufficient number of troops were also at this time stationed in
Baltimore, and the loyal citizens were assured that they would be
protected in all their rights and privileges, at every hazard. Thus
fortified, protected and encouraged, the loyalty of the people was fully
displayed, while the disloyal were held in check. Maryland, glorious in
her past history, and her devotion to the Constitution, was saved from
destruction, and her loyal citizens will in generations to come receive
the plaudits of millions whose gratitude will be deep enough to
overwhelm her few days of revolt.




                 DESTRUCTION OF THE GOSPORT NAVY YARD.

                            APRIL 21, 1861.


The splendid naval and military establishment at Gosport, Virginia,
belonging to the Federal Government, was, at the time Virginia seceded,
in the possession of the United States. It was supplied with immense
quantities of military and naval stores; and several old vessels which
had been withdrawn from service, and others of great value, were either
waiting orders to sail or undergoing repairs. The entire establishment,
whether on land or water, was indispensable to the conspirators, for the
possession of the Navy Yard would give them immediate control of
ordnance stores and property worth $30,000,000.

The seizure of this vast establishment having been determined upon, five
or six vessels had been sunk by the rebels in the channel of the
Elizabeth river, below the Navy Yard, thus effectually preventing the
passage of larger vessels.

General Taliaferro was placed in command of the insurgent forces then
rapidly concentrating at Norfolk. Commodore McCauley, who commanded at
the Navy Yard, had been reluctant to adopt any measures which would
bring him into hostility with the State troops, and thus inaugurate the
war. The rebels took advantage of this leniency, but for once they were
disappointed in their expectations of success. The Commodore determined
to destroy the _immediate agencies of the war_, leaving the armories,
ship wood, docks and dwellings unharmed, hoping that, although they
might for a time be occupied by the insurgents, the stars and stripes
would eventually float over them in triumph.

At 8½ o’clock on Saturday evening, the 20th April, the Pawnee,
containing 600 Massachusetts troops from Fortress Monroe, arrived at
Gosport harbor, the Commodore’s flag at its mast-head the white sails,
relieved by the dark blue sky, appearing more like the floating wings of
the dove of peace than heralds of destruction. The scene that followed
is thus graphically described by an eye-witness.

Her coming was not unexpected, and as she glided to her place at the
dock, the men on the Pennsylvania and the Cumberland, several hundred in
number, greeted her with a volley of cheers that echoed and re-echoed
till all Norfolk and Portsmouth must have heard the hail. The men of the
Pennsylvania fairly outdid themselves in their enthusiasm on this
occasion. They clambered into the shrouds, and not only answered to the
“three cheers,” but volunteered “three times three,” and gave them with
a hurricane of heartiness. This intense feeling on their part is easily
explained. They had been a long time almost imprisoned on shipboard, on
a ship imbedded in the river, motionless and helpless, and subject to
_promises_ from the secessionists of speedy demolition. In the advent of
the Pawnee they saw deliverance from such durance, and they exulted with
tremendous emphasis.

All Portsmouth and Norfolk were thoroughly aroused by the arrival of the
Pawnee. They did not expect her, and were not prepared for her. They
were seized with trepidation, thinking, perhaps, she had come, and along
with the Cumberland and Pennsylvania, meant to bombard the towns for
having obstructed the channel, and for having, the night before, rifled
the United States magazine, just below Norfolk, of about 4,000 kegs of
powder. Being utterly defenceless and quite terrified, the secessionists
made no protest against the Pawnee’s presence, nor did they venture too
near the Navy Yard.

The Pawnee made fast to the dock, and Colonel Wardrop marched out his
regiment and stationed them at the several gates of the Navy Yard to
oppose the entrance of any forces from without, in case an attempt to
enter should be made. Having adopted this precaution, the Commodore set
the marines on the Pennsylvania, the Cumberland, the Pawnee, and in the
yard, to work. All the books and papers, the archives of the
establishment, were transferred to the Pawnee.

Everything of interest to the Government on the Pennsylvania was
promptly transferred to the Cumberland. On this latter vessel, it was
also said, a large amount of gold from the Custom House at Norfolk had
been in good time placed. Having made safe everything that was to be
brought away, the marines were next set to work to destroy everything on
the Pennsylvania, and the other ships, and in the yard, that might be of
immediate use in waging war upon the government. Many thousand stands of
arms were destroyed. Carbines had their stocks broken from the barrels
by a blow, and were thrown overboard. A large lot of revolvers shared
the like fate. Shot and shell by thousands went with hurried plunge to
the bottom. Most of the cannon had been spiked the day and night before.
There were at least 1,500 pieces in the yard—some elegant Dahlgren guns,
and Columbiads of all sizes.

It is impossible to describe the scene of destruction that was
exhibited. Unweariedly it was continued from 9 o’clock until about 12,
during which time the moon gave light to direct the operations. But when
the moon sank behind the western horizon, the barracks near the centre
of the yard were set on fire, that by its illumination the work might be
continued. The crackling flames and the glare of light inspired with new
energies the destroying marines, and havoc was carried everywhere within
the limits of orders. But time was not left to complete the work. Four
o’clock of Sunday morning came, and the Pawnee was passing down from
Gosport harbor with the Cumberland, the coveted prize of the
secessionists, in tow—every soul from the other ships and the yard being
aboard of them, save two. Just as they left their moorings, a rocket was
sent up from the deck of the Pawnee. It sped high in air, paused a
second, and burst in shivers of many-colored light. As it did so, the
well-set trains at the ship-houses, and on the decks of the fated
vessels left behind, went off as if lit simultaneously by the rocket.
One of the ship-houses contained the old New York, a ship thirty years
on the stocks, and yet unfinished. The other was vacant; but both houses
and the old New York burnt like tinder. The older and unserviceable
vessels, the Pennsylvania, the Raritan, the Columbia, the Dolphin, were
fired without compunction; while the Merrimac, Plymouth and Germantown
were sunk, and the immense lifting shears used for raising vessels was
broken down and rendered useless. The old Delaware and Columbus, worn
out and dismantled seventy-fours, were scuttled and sunk at the upper
docks on Friday.

The grand conflagration now burst in judgment on the startled citizens
of Norfolk, Portsmouth, and all the surrounding country. The flames
leaped from pitchy deck to smoking shrouds, and writhed to their very
tops around the masts that stood like martyrs doomed. It was not thirty
minutes from the time the trains were fired till the conflagration
roared like a hurricane, and the flames from land and water swayed, and
met, and mingled together, and darted high, and fell, and leaped up
again, and by their very motion showed their sympathy with the
crackling, crashing roar of destruction beneath. But in all this
magnificent scene, the old ship Pennsylvania was the centre-piece. She
was a very giant in death, as she had been in life. She was a sea of
flame, and when her bowels were consuming, then did she spout from every
porthole of every deck torrents and cataracts of fire that, to the mind
of Milton, would have represented her a frigate of hell pouring out
unremitting broadsides of infernal fire. Several of her guns were left
loaded, but not shotted, and as the fire reached them, they sent out on
the startled morning air minute guns of fearful peal, that added greatly
to the alarm that the light of the conflagration had spread through the
surrounding country. The Pennsylvania burnt like a volcano for five
hours and a half before her mainmast fell. At precisely 9½ o’clock the
tall tree that stood in her centre tottered and fell, and crushed deep
into her burning sides, whilst a storm of sparks filled the sky.

As soon as the Pawnee and Cumberland had fairly left the waters, and
were known to be gone, the gathering crowds of Portsmouth and Norfolk
burst open the gates of the Navy Yard and rushed in. They could do
nothing, however, but gaze upon the ruin wrought. The Commodore’s,
residence, left locked but unharmed, was burst open, and a pillage
commenced, which was summarily stopped. As early as six o’clock a
volunteer company had taken possession in the name of Virginia, and run
up her flag from the flagstaff. In another hour several companies were
on hand, and men were at work unspiking cannon, and by nine o’clock they
were moving them to the dock, whence they were begun to be transferred,
on keels, to points below, where sand batteries were to be built.

Notwithstanding the splendor of the scene, and the great destruction of
property, the result was incomplete, and a large amount of artillery and
munitions of war fell into the hands of the Virginians.




      THE STATE OF THE NATION BEFORE ITS TROOPS ENTERED VIRGINIA.


President Lincoln, on the 15th of April, issued a proclamation stating
that the laws of the United States had been and are opposed in several
States, by combinations too powerful to be suppressed by the ordinary
course of judicial proceedings; he therefore called for 75,000 troops
from the several States. The first service assigned to this force would
probably be to repossess the forts and other places and property which
had been seized from the Union. An extra session of Congress was also to
meet on the 4th of July.

When President Lincoln issued his proclamation on the 15th of April,
dispatches were sent from the Secretary of War, addressed to the
Governors of the several States, designating the quotas assigned to each
State, under this proclamation. The Executives of the slaveholding
States, with the exception of Maryland and Delaware, peremptorily
refused to comply with this requisition. Governor Ellis, of North
Carolina, replied, “I regard the levy of troops made by the
Administration for the purpose of subjugating the States of the South as
in violation of the Constitution, and a usurpation of power. I can be no
party to this wicked violation of the laws of the country, and to this
war upon the rights of a free people. You can get no troops from North
Carolina.” Governor Jackson, of Missouri, answered, “There can be, I
apprehend, no doubt but these men are intended to form part of the
President’s army to make war upon the people of the seceding States.
Your requisition, in my judgment, is illegal, unconstitutional and
revolutionary in its objects, altogether inhuman and diabolical, and
cannot be complied with. Not one man will Missouri furnish to carry on
such an unholy crusade.” Governor Magoffin, of Kentucky, replied, “In
answer, I say emphatically, that Kentucky will furnish no troops for the
wicked purpose of subduing her sister Southern States.” Governor
Letcher, of Virginia, answered, “I have only to say that the militia of
Virginia will not be furnished to the powers at Washington for any such
use or purpose as they have in view. Your object is to subjugate the
Southern States, and a requisition made upon me for such an object—an
object, in my judgment, not within the purview of the Constitution, or
the Act of 1795—will not be complied with. You have chosen to inaugurate
civil war, and having done so, we will meet it in a spirit as determined
as the Administration has exhibited toward the South.” Governor Harris,
of Tennessee, refused, in terms equally explicit, to comply with the
requisition of the Government. In his Message to the Legislature, dated
April 25, he takes strong ground against the action of the
Administration, which he says is designed for the subjugation of the
Southern States. He recommended the immediate passage of an Act of
Secession, and an Act for the union of Tennessee with the Southern
Confederacy, both to be submitted separately to the people at an early
day. He also recommended an appropriation for arming the State, and the
creation of a large military fund, to be placed under the direction of a
special board.

The position of Virginia is of the greatest importance to a thorough
understanding of the difficulties in which the country was placed. At
the breaking out of hostilities, the State Convention was in session. A
resolution was passed, expressing an earnest desire for the
re-establishment of the Union in its former integrity: an amendment,
declaring that Virginia ought not to accept a form of adjustment which
would not be acceptable to the seceding States, was rejected.
Commissioners were appointed to wait on the President, and ascertain the
policy which he intended to pursue. An amendment, denying the right of
the Federal Government to deal with the question of secession, was
rejected. A resolution was adopted, expressing a willingness that the
independence of the seceding States should be acknowledged. An
amendment, declaring that Virginia would secede in case the proposed
amendments to the Constitution were rejected by the non-slaveholding
States, was lost. And resolutions were adopted, opposing any action on
the part of the Federal Government for retaining or retaking forts in
the seceding States, and affirming, that any measures of the Government,
tending to produce hostilities with the Confederate States, would leave
Virginia free to determine her own future policy. When the proclamation
of the President, calling for troops, was issued, the Convention went
into secret session, on the 17th of April, passed an ordinance to repeal
the ratification of the Constitution of the United States, by the State
of Virginia, and to resume all the rights and powers granted under such
Constitution.

When the proclamation was received at Montgomery, President Davis issued
a proclamation, dated on the 17th of April, inviting all persons to
apply for letters of marque and reprisal, to be issued under the seal of
the Confederate States. President Lincoln thereupon, on the 19th, issued
a proclamation, announcing the blockade of all the ports of the seceding
States, and that a competent force would be stationed to prevent the
entrance and exit of vessels at these ports. On the 27th, the President
issued a proclamation extending the blockade to the ports of North
Carolina and Virginia. It was announced that the blockade would be
maintained by at least fifty vessels of war, accompanied by a fleet of
steam transports, capable of conveying an army of 20,000 men. On the 3d
of May the President issued another proclamation, calling into service
42,000 volunteers to serve for a period of three years, unless sooner
discharged; ordering that the regular army should be increased by 22,714
men; and directing the enlistment, for the naval force of the United
States, of 18,000 seamen, for a period of not less than one or more than
three years.

The Congress of the Confederate States met at Montgomery on the 29th of
April. The message of President Davis announced that the permanent
Constitution had been ratified by a sufficient number of States to
render it valid, and that it only remained to elect officers under its
provisions. The message of President Lincoln, calling for volunteers,
was characterized as a declaration of war, which will render it
necessary to adopt measures to replenish the treasury of the
Confederation, and provide for the defence of the country. Proposals had
been issued, inviting subscriptions for a loan of five millions; more
than eight millions was subscribed for, none under par. The whole amount
had been ordered to be accepted; and it was now necessary to raise a
much larger sum. The Confederate States had in the field, at Charleston,
Pensacola, and different forts, 19,000 men, and 16,000 were on route for
Virginia. It was proposed to organize and hold in readiness an army of
100,000 men. “We seek no conquest,” says Mr. Davis, “no aggrandizement,
no concession from the Free States. All that we ask is to be let alone;
that none shall attempt our subjugation by arms. This we will, and must,
resist to the direst extremity. The moment this pretension is abandoned,
the sword will drop from our grasp, and we shall be ready to enter into
treaties of amity and commerce mutually beneficial.” In the meanwhile
warlike and aggressive measures had been pushed forward with all
possible activity. The forces besieging Fort Pickens had been augmented,
and new batteries had been constructed against it. Vessels belonging to
the government and to individuals had been seized. Among these was the
steamer Star of the West, which had been dispatched to Indianola, Texas,
to bring away the United States troops collected at that port. The
vessel was lying at anchor, awaiting the arrival of the troops. At
midnight, of the 19th of April, the steamer Rusk approached, and the
captain of the Star of the West was informed that she had on board 320
United States troops, which were to be embarked.

Every assistance was given for the reception of the supposed soldiers,
who, however, proved to be Texan troops. As soon as they were on board
they took possession of the steamer, which was taken to New Orleans, the
crew being detained as prisoners of war. Shortly after, 450 of the
United States troops attempted to make their escape from Indianola on
board of two sailing vessels. They were pursued by two armed steamers,
manned by the Texans, overtaken, and made prisoners.

The loyal States had not only been patriotic in sending troops to the
capital, but in supplying money also. The Legislature of New York
appropriated three millions of dollars for arming and equipping troops;
Connecticut appropriated two millions; Vermont one million; New Jersey
two millions, and other States in proportion. The Common Council of the
city of New York appropriated one million. Besides the public
appropriations, in every considerable town and city private
subscriptions were made for the same purposes, and to support the
families of volunteers. The aggregate of the sums thus furnished was
estimated at twenty-five millions—all raised in a few days.

Meantime the Confederate government had adjourned on the 20th of May to
meet in Richmond, Virginia, on the 20th of July, or some other
convenient place to be selected by the President.

On the 6th of May an act was passed “recognizing the existence of war
between the United States and the Confederate States, and concerning
letters of marque, prizes, and prize goods.” This act gave the President
of the Confederate States authority to use the whole land and naval
forces of the Confederacy to meet the war thus commenced, and to issue
letters of marque and reprisal against the vessels and property of the
United States and their citizens, with the exception of the States
belonging to the Confederation or expected to join it.

An act was passed prohibiting the export of cotton or cotton yarn from
any of the Confederate States except through the sea-ports. It was
proposed in Congress that the cotton planters should be invited to put
their crops in the hands of the government, receiving bonds for its
value, the government to dispose of it in Europe for cash. The
Postmaster-General, on the 1st of June, took charge of the transmission
of the mails in the Confederate States; and the Postmaster-General of
the United States announced that on that day postal communication would
close with the seceding States, with the exception of some counties in
Western Virginia. All letters for these States were sent to the Dead
Letter Office at Washington.

Two more States—Arkansas and North Carolina—had formally seceded from
the Union, and joined the Confederate States. In Arkansas the State
Convention, on the 18th of April, had passed an ordinance submitting the
question of secession to the people, at an election to be held on the 3d
of August. When the requisition of President Lincoln was received,
Governor Rector, on the 22d of April, replied to the Secretary of War,
“In answer to your requisition for troops from Arkansas to subjugate the
Southern States, I have to say that none will be furnished. The demand
is only adding insult to injury. The people of this Commonwealth are
freemen and not slaves, and will defend to the last extremity their
honor, lives and property against Northern mendacity and usurpation.” On
the same day the Governor gave orders for the seizure at Napoleon of a
large quantity of military supplies belonging to the United States. On
the 6th of May, the Convention, which had re-assembled, unanimously
passed an ordinance of secession.

Tennessee also virtually, though not in form, joined the Southern
Confederacy. The Legislature passed a Declaration of Independence, which
was to be submitted to the people on the 8th of June. Meanwhile a
military league had been formed with the Confederate government, in
virtue of which the forces of Tennessee were to be employed to aid the
Confederate States.

In Kentucky a determined effort was made to preserve a strict
neutrality. Governor Magoffin, as before noted, refused peremptorily to
comply with the President’s requisition for troops. On the 20th of May
he issued a proclamation declaring that every indication of public
sentiment in Kentucky showed a fixed determination of the people to take
neither side, but to maintain a posture of self-defence, forbidding the
quartering upon her soil of troops from either section, in the hope that
the State might yet become a mediator between the parties. He therefore
warned all States, whether separate or united, and especially the
Confederate and the United States, against any armed occupation within
the State of Kentucky, without the permission of the Legislature and
Executive authorities. All citizens of Kentucky were forbidden to make
any demonstration against either of the sovereignties, but were directed
to make prompt and efficient preparations for the defence of the State.
Of similar purport were the proceedings of the “Border States
Convention,” held at Frankfort. Virginia, North Carolina and Arkansas,
having joined the Southern Confederacy, of course sent no delegates;
none appeared from Maryland, and only one from Tennessee, and four from
Missouri. The remainder were from Kentucky. Senator Crittenden was
chosen President. Two addresses, one to the people of the United States,
and the other to the people of Kentucky, were adopted. The essential
point in the first address is the recommendation that Congress would
propose such Constitutional amendments as should secure the legal rights
of slaveholders; and if this should fail to bring about a pacification,
that a Convention be called composed of delegates from all the States,
to devise measures of peaceable adjustment.

The address to the people of Kentucky defended the action of the
Executive in refusing troops to the Federal Government, as called for by
the peculiar circumstances in which the State was placed. “In all
things,” says the address, “she is as loyal as ever to the
constitutional administration of the government. She will follow the
stars and stripes to the utmost regions of the earth, and defend it from
foreign insult. She refuses alliance with any who would destroy the
Union. All she asks is permission to keep out of this unnatural strife.
She has announced her intention to refrain from aggression upon others,
and she must protest against her soil being made the theatre of military
operations by any belligerent.” The address goes on to censure the
conduct of the States who have withdrawn from the Union, affirming that
there was in the Constitution a remedy for every wrong, and provisions
to check every encroachment by the majority upon the minority. In
withdrawing the States committed “a great wrong, for which they must
answer to posterity. But Kentucky remained true to herself, contending
with all her might for what were considered to be the rights of the
people, and although one after another of the States that should have
been by her side ungenerously deserted her, leaving her almost alone in
the field, yet she did not surrender her rights under the Constitution,
and never would surrender them. She would appear again in the Congress
of the United States, not having conceded the least atom of power to the
Government that had not heretofore been granted, and retaining every
power she had reserved. She would insist upon her constitutional rights
in the Union, and not out of it.” The address went on to say that if the
war should be transferred to Kentucky, her destruction would be the
inevitable result; “and even the institution to preserve or control
which the wretched war was undertaken, would be exterminated in the
general ruin.”

In Virginia the vote upon secession resulted in a large majority in its
favor. In the north-western part of the State the vote was largely in
favor of the Union. A Convention of the Western Counties convened at
Wheeling on the 13th of May, at which resolutions were passed
pronouncing the ordinance of secession null and void. The Convention
adjourned to meet on the 11th of June.

The position of Missouri was similar to that of Kentucky. The State
endeavored to avoid taking part in the war. Troops had been organized
with hostile designs against the Government. These were forced to
surrender by Captain Lyon, (afterward appointed General). At St. Louis
an attack was made by the populace, on the 10th of May, upon the United
States volunteers; they returned the fire, killing some twenty; an
_émeute_ on the next day resulted in the loss of several lives. General
Harney, who had been put in command of this district, entered into an
agreement with the State authorities, that was disapproved by the
Government, and he relieved from the command, which was then given to
General Lyon.

The attitude assumed by the great powers of Europe in relation to the
American war was important. That of England, indicated by the royal
proclamation issued on the 14th of May a determination to maintain a
strict neutrality in the contest between the contending parties. The
proclamation went on to forbid all British subjects from taking part in
any way in the contest, by enlisting in the army or navy of either
party; by fitting out or arming any vessel; by breaking any lawfully
established blockade, or carrying to either, troops or any articles
contraband of war. This proclamation, taken in connection with the
explanations of the Ministers and the speeches in Parliament, had an
unfriendly aspect toward the United States, recognizing, as it did, the
Confederate States as belligerents, and, by implication, entitled
equally to the right of carrying prizes into the ports of Great Britain.
In the House of Commons, Lord John Russell said that the character of
belligerency was not so much a principle as a fact; that a certain
amount of force and consistency acquired by any mass of population
engaged in war entitled them to be treated as a belligerent. A power or
a community which was at war with another, and which covered the sea
with its cruizers, must either be acknowledged as a belligerent or dealt
with as a pirate. The Government had come to the opinion that the
Southern Confederacy, according to those principles which were
considered just, must be treated as belligerent. In this critical
condition was the country when the Government prepared to advance its
armies into Virginia.




                     OCCUPATION OF ALEXANDRIA, Va.


                  ASSASSINATION OF COLONEL ELLSWORTH.

                             MAY 24, 1861.

The defenders of the Union had been gathering at Washington and in its
vicinity for more than a month, in answer to the call for troops, that
rang through the land clear as clarion notes. The arduous labor of
providing for and disciplining the large number of untrained recruits,
collected in such haste, had been met with energy and perseverance by
the officers of the government. Very much had been accomplished,
notwithstanding all the embarrassments incident to an extensive and
untried field of labor.

The heart of the country was beating restively at delay, and popular
feeling, as it found its voice through the press, thundered anathemas,
and clamored for a forward movement. Nothing but prompt and decisive
action would satisfy the people that the government was sturdily bending
its whole energies to strangle the monster treason in its youth. The
people had not yet learned the first great secret of success—how to
wait. They saw the ship of state struggling fiercely amid the rocks of
an untried ocean, and worshiping the flag at her mast-head, grew
clamorous for its protection. Every newspaper, and almost every
household, had its own ideas of how this was to be accomplished. The
government, unused to war, and anxious to gratify the spirit of
patriotism that had supported it so nobly, was ready to answer the rash
clamor; and so this long, loud cry of ignorant impatience became words
of fate, and ended in giving us the defeat of Bull Run.

The people, the generous loyal people, ever dissatisfied with anything
but lightning speed, in peace or war, clamored for action, and must be
appeased. Under this pressure, events forced each other on, culminating
in action.

Though an act of secession had been passed by a State Convention, held
at Richmond on the 17th of April, it was professedly to be submitted to
the people of the State of Virginia for their approval on the 23d of
May; and though it had been determined by the United States Government
to take possession of, and fortify the Virginia hills, in front of the
capital, it was deemed advisable to await that event before making any
military movement into that State which could be interpreted into an
attempt to influence or control the popular vote. The conspirators,
however, without waiting for any ratification of their secession act by
the people, immediately made a conveyance of the State to the
Confederate government, and claimed its protection; thus effectually
leaving the “mother of States” to associate with the disobedient
daughters.

In consequence of the action of Governor Letcher, Confederate troops
from Georgia, Mississippi, and other Southern States, were sent rapidly
into Virginia, and located at various points, where it was deemed that
they could be of the most use, and best serve the interests of the
Confederacy. The result of this movement could easily have been
foretold. The election was held under military _regime_ and terrorism,
and loyal men, having been warned of the penalty of voting against
secession, either feared to do so, or neglected to vote altogether; a
majority was secured for the ordinance, and Virginia, “mother of
Presidents,” had taken her second grand step in the downward path of
disunion.

The people of the city of Alexandria were generally infected with
disloyalty, and rebel flags floated boldly from many of the principal
buildings. A detachment of Confederate troops was at all times quartered
within its limits, and with the hope of capturing them and their
supplies, it was determined to occupy the city by a surprise movement.
The result of the election clearly foreshadowed, arrangements were made
for action—prompt and decisive action—to follow immediately upon the
closing of the polls, where disunionists had played a mere farce, and
disloyal bayonets had fettered the freedom of the ballot-box.

On the night of May 23d, orders were given for an advance to the troops
designed for this expedition, numbering in all about 13,000, and at ten
o’clock an advance guard of picked men moved cautiously over the bridge.
Sent to reconnoitre, their commands were imperative that if assaulted
they were to signalize for reinforcements, which would be speedily
furnished by a corps of infantry and a battery. At twelve o’clock the
regiment of infantry, the artillery and the cavalry corps began to
muster, and as fast as they were prepared, proceeded to the Long Bridge,
the portion of the force then in Washington being directed to take that
route. The troops quartered at Georgetown, comprising the Fifth, Eighth,
Twenty-eighth and Sixty-ninth New York, also proceeded across the Chain
Bridge, under the command of General McDowell.

At half-past one o’clock, six companies of District Volunteers,
including the National Rifles, and Turners, stepped from the Long Bridge
upon Virginia soil. To capture the enemy’s patrols by the means of boats
had been the original plan, but the bright moonlight prevented it. This
vanguard was commanded by Inspector-General Stone, under whom Captain
Smead led the centre, Adjutant Abbott the left, and Captain Stewart the
right wing. When within half a mile of Alexandria, they halted and
awaited the arrival of the main body.

The remainder of the army crossed in the following order: The Twelfth
and Twenty-fifth New York, First Michigan, and First, Second, Third, and
Fourth New Jersey; two regular cavalry corps of eighty men each, and
Sherman’s two batteries; next and last came the New York Seventh.
General Mansfield directed the movements of the troops. At a quarter to
four the last of the forces left, and fifteen minutes later
Major-General Sanford, accompanied by his staff, proceeded to Virginia
to assume the command.

The famous Sixty-ninth New York, after crossing the river below
Georgetown, took position on the Orange and Manassas Gap railroad, and
surrounded and captured the train from Alexandria, with a large number
of passengers, of which a few, known to be violent secession partizans,
were retained as prisoners.

As the Michigan regiment, accompanied by two guns of Sherman’s renowned
battery, and a company of regular cavalry, marched into the town, a
detachment of thirty-five rebel horsemen were found preparing to mount.
The battery came up the street towards them like a whirlwind, and they
soon surrendered.

The New York Fire Zouaves, under the command of Colonel E. E. Ellsworth,
were conveyed in steamers, and as the day was dawning their dashing
uniform and fearless faces flashed upon the citizens of Alexandria. Not
until they had landed did the rebel sentinels discover them, and then,
after firing their muskets as a signal of warning, they hastened to
alarm the sleeping city.

Little need had those brave and untameable “fire fighters” of
directions. The master spirit of all their movements had imbued them
with feelings akin to his own. They knew their duty, and men trained as
they had been in a severe school of danger, could never be backward in
performing it. Ellsworth, who, as it might seem, with the shadows of
death already gathering around him, could sit calmly down in the dim
midnight, after addressing his men in a brief and stirring speech,
announcing the orders to march on Alexandria, closing with the well
remembered words, “Now boys, go to bed and wake up at two o’clock for a
sail and a skirmish;” and after arranging the business of his regiment,
pen letters that seemed “as if the mystical gales from the near eternity
must have breathed for a moment over his soul, freighted with the odor
of amaranths and asphodels”—needed none to tell him of his duty or to
urge him to its even rash fulfilment.

In the early light of morning he entered the rebel town. A secession
flag waved defiantly from the Marshall House, and with the fiery
enthusiasm of his nature, Ellsworth rushed to tear down the hated emblem
of enmity to the Union he loved so well. With his own hand he tore the
flag from its fastening, and descending the stairs flushed with the
pride of success, came upon his fate. A musket in the hands of the
proprietor, J. W. Jackson, pealed his death-knell, and he sealed the
glories of that too well remembered morning, with his heart’s blood.

[Illustration:

  ASSASSINATION OF COLONEL ELLSWORTH.
]

BROWNELL, a name now linked with Ellsworth’s in all history, was his
prompt avenger, and the blood of patriot and assassin ran commingled, a
ghastly stream. Both will be long remembered—will stand shadowed forth
to the future from the past—one a brave, tender, chivalric heart; and
the other, reckless in his courage, vindictive in his passions, and
terrible in his cruelty.

And the morning of that day, now lined upon the page of history with
letters of blood, that never to be forgotten 24th of May, re-awoke the
enthusiasm and stern resolve of Sumter—caused the finest strings of a
nation’s heart to vibrate with sorrow, and hosts that never before
unsheathed a sabre, shouldered a gun or helmeted their brows, had never
marched beneath a banner, or given a thought to the glories of war,
leaped forth, Minerva-like, fully armed for the strife. Swift vengeance,
indeed, followed the death of Ellsworth, but what was that compared to
the iron hate of such hearts?

Not here, truly, is the proper place to write the life-history of
EPHRAIM ELMER ELLSWORTH, but this much it is fitting—necessary almost to
recapitulate. Born in the little village of Mechanicsville, on the banks
of the Hudson, on the 23d of April, A.D. 1837, he, after passing through
trials that would have utterly discouraged a less ambitious and sanguine
man, rendered himself famous by the inauguration, drill, and _marche de
triomphe_ of the _Chicago Zouaves_. All the country remembers the
bloodless march of those young men—the “crimson phantoms” that blazed
comet-like before their eyes and secured the championship, without a
struggle. When the war broke out, when the knell of Sumter’s fall shook
the very corner-stone of the nation, Ellsworth sought a place in the
army. Jealousy and fear of the youthful aspirant impeded him, and
turning his back upon Washington, he hastened to New York, organized the
Fire Zouaves, and rushed to his fate.

One who knew him well, and has written a glorious prose-poem to his
memory, thus briefly described him. “His person was strikingly
prepossessing. His form, though slight, exactly the Napoleonic size, was
very compact and commanding: the head statuesquely poised and crowned
with a luxuriance of curling black hair; a hazel eye, bright though
serene, the eye of a gentleman as well as a soldier; a nose such as you
see on Roman medals; a light moustache, just shading the lips, that were
continually curving into the sunniest smiles. His voice, deep and
musical, instantly attracted attention, and his address, though not
without soldierly brusqueness, was sincere and courteous.”

And thus, in the very prime of manhood and vigor, with one of the
military insignia he sometimes wore—a golden circle, inscribed with the
legend “NON NOBIS, SED PRO PATRIA,” driven into his heart by the bullet
of his assassin, perished a brave spirit—an ambitious follower after the
“pride, pomp, and circumstance of glorious war”—a soul devoted to his
country and his country’s honor—an eagle struck in its high soaring,
down—a spirit of fire, fretting at causeless delay, burning against
useless restraints, and rushing on to snatch success even from the
cannon’s mouth.

A nation mourned him long—has not yet forgotten him, and green will ever
be the laurel she entwines around the name of the boy-martyr of
Alexandria! “Remember Ellsworth” became a watchword with the volunteers,
who pledged themselves to avenge his death, and well they redeemed it.
His life was stainless and loyal—his death, sealed with his blood the
holy bond of his noble faith.

When Lincoln saw this young man lying in his coffin, it is said that he
wept over him. It was the first shock and horror of war brought home to
the chief magistrate. Alas! if he has wept for all the brave that have
since fallen, his days and nights must have been given up to tears.

Alexandria and its neighborhood were occupied by the Federal troops, and
a company of Virginia cavalry were captured; after a detention of some
days they were released upon taking the oath of allegiance to the United
States. Intrenchments were thrown up around Alexandria, and upon
Arlington Heights, which commanded a portion of the capital. Bodies of
troops were pushed forward toward Manassas Junction, with the object of
interrupting the communication between Richmond and Harper’s Ferry.

A detachment took possession of Arlington, the old Curtis Mansion, which
had been deserted by its owner, General Lee, when he gave up his flag
and took sides with its enemies.

It is said that General Scott held this officer in such high
appreciation that he offered him the chance of any position under
himself in the Union army. When the letter reached Lee, containing this
noble proposition, he was sitting with his family at Arlington. He read
the letter in silence, and laying it on the table, covered his face with
one hand. When he looked up traces of tears were in his eyes, and he
said in a broken voice, “What am I to do? If I take up arms for the
Union it must be to turn them on my native State, my own neighbors, dear
relations. If I do not, they will brand me as a traitor!”

Again he fell into thought. The result was that he abandoned the home
consecrated by Washington, and turned upon the flag that great man had
planted.

On the 1st of June, a company of cavalry set out on a scouting
expedition to Fairfax Court House, about twenty miles beyond the
outposts. Some hundreds of Virginia troops were stationed here, and a
sharp skirmish ensued. Several of the Virginians were reported to have
been killed; one of the United States troops was killed, and four or
five wounded, among whom was the commander, Lieutenant Tompkins. The
cavalry withdrew, having made five prisoners, and leaving two of their
own number as captives. On the following day the same cavalry company
made another dash to Fairfax, and rescued their comrades who had been
left behind.




                        BATTLE OF GREAT BETHEL.

                             JUNE 10, 1861.


The first engagement on the field occurred at Great Bethel, about ten
miles north of Newport News, on the road from Hampton to Yorktown,
Virginia, the place having derived its name from a large church, near
which the rebels had an entrenched camp.

Under cover of night, the forces, who were under the command of General
B. F. Butler, had been repeatedly annoyed by the secession forces, whose
rendezvous was Little Bethel, distant about eight miles from Newport
News, and the same distance from Hampton, where, also, a church was used
as the headquarters of their cavalry, thus literally putting “holy
things to an unholy use.” The Union-loving, or, at least,
Union-respecting citizens, were continually robbed—slaves were impressed
to work upon their fortifications, and all that forethought could
suggest was recklessly accomplished.

Determined to put a stop to these forays, General Butler organized an
expedition for the purpose of surprising the rebels at Little Bethel,
giving to the officers commanding discretionary powers, as no positive
information could be obtained with regard to their defences or forces.

General Pierce, of Massachusetts, who had the command at Hampton, was
instructed to detach Colonels Duryea and Townsend’s New York regiments,
and Colonel Phelps, commanding at Newport News, was also commanded to
start an equal force, about an hour later, to make a demonstration in
front. One regiment from each command was directed to repair to a point
about one mile from Little Bethel, and there await further orders.
Should the design prove successful, they were, when directed, to follow
close upon the enemy, drive them into their entrenchments at Big Bethel
and attack them.

A naval brigade—a new volunteer organization, stationed at Hampton
Roads, had been exercised in the management of scows, with capacity for
carrying about one hundred and thirty men, besides those at the oars,
and when the night came settling down in darkness, they set out, with
muffled oars, passed the mouth of Hampton river, and silently proceeded
up the stream. Moored at the hither shore of Hampton, at midnight they
awaited the time when the blow was to be struck.

Three companies of Duryea’s New York Fifth, under the command of Captain
Kilpatrick, crossed and went forward on the Bethel road, followed soon
after by the remainder of the regiment, and Colonel Townsend’s New York
Third. One hour later, five companies, each of the Vermont First and
Massachusetts Fourth, under Lieutenant-Colonel Washburne; six companies
of the New York Seventh, Colonel Bendix, and a squad of regulars, with
three small field pieces under Lieutenant Greble, moved forward from
Newport News.

At about one o’clock, A. M., the three companies under Captain
Kilpatrick reached New Market Bridge—at about three o’clock they were
joined by the main body and started for Little Bethel. The pickets of
the enemy were surprised, the officer in command captured, and the Union
forces, flushed with success, were pushing forward, when the sound of
heavy firing in their rear checked them.

Meantime, the force from Newport News came up the road from that place,
and took the road from Hampton to Bethel, not far behind the Fifth; but
they left at the junction of the roads, under Colonel Bendix, a rear
guard of one hundred and seventy men and one field piece, with the order
to hold this position at all hazards, where they were to be joined by
Colonel Townsend’s regiment from Hampton. Almost immediately after, the
Third New York regiment came up the Hampton road. It was still dark, and
their colors could not be seen. Their approach also was over a ridge,
and as General Pierce and staff, and Colonel Townsend and staff, in a
body, rode in front of their troops, and without any advance guard
thrown out, as customary, to reconnoitre, they appeared from Colonel
Bendix’s position to be a troop of cavalry. It was known that the
Federal force had no cavalry, and the fire of this rear guard was poured
into the advancing body, at the distance of a quarter of a mile. But the
road in which the Third was marching was a little below the level of the
land along the edge, and was bordered on either side by fences, forming
a partial cover, and rendering the fire comparatively harmless. Fifteen
men, however, were wounded and two killed. The Third then fell back and
formed upon a hill, and the force again moved in the following order:
Colonel Duryea with the New York Fifth; Lieutenant-Colonel Washburne
with the companies from Newport News, and Greble’s battery; Colonel
Townsend, with the New York Third; Colonel Allen, with the New York
First; and Colonel Carr, with the New York Second.

The advance was made with great rapidity and fearlessness, and soon the
lurid flames of Little Bethel shot upwards in the murky air, and lighted
up the country far and wide. Great Bethel was reached next, and our
troops received their first intimation of the location of the enemy that
was pouring hissing shot upon them from a masked battery. But they were
not to be stayed by the iron rain. Steadily, unflinchingly, though death
was threatening them every instant, they marched on and gained a
position within two hundred yards of the enemy’s works. For two hours
the whirl and clash and roar of the battle was terrific. Every soldier
fought as if upon his individual efforts rested the chances of the day.
Charge after charge of the greatest gallantry was made by the infantry
against their invisible foemen, and though suffering terribly from the
deadly fire, still pouring fiercely upon them, no one thought of
retreat. At length, however, General Pierce deemed the exposure too
great, and the chances of success too small to warrant a more persistent
struggle, and the troops were withdrawn in good order.

Where all fought so nobly, it would be simply invidious to
particularize. But one brave heart there was called home from amid the
smoke and tumult of battle that cannot be forgotten. THEODORE WINTHROP,
Major, and formerly of the New York Seventh, there gave his life for his
country—his blood as an offering of sacrifice. A gentleman and scholar
as well as a soldier—rich in the rare gifts of genius, he had earned
fame in literature before he found that glorious death upon the battle
field. He had been one of the foremost to press forward in the hour of
his country’s need, and breathed his last, nobly struggling for her
honor, with wild battle notes ringing in his ear, and the starry flag
waving unconquered above him.

Lieutenant Greble, also, an officer of great promise—of coolness, energy
and discretion, won for himself a deathless name and a soldier’s grave
in this battle. Many others, too, of whom fame will not always be
silent, men of noble hearts and fearless courage, hallowed the cause
with their blood, and when the records of a nation’s jewels shall have
been perfected, will be found side by side with the hero-author of Great
Bethel.




                      THE AMBUSCADE AT VIENNA, Va.

                             JUNE 17, 1861.


Information that an attempt would be made to destroy the bridges on the
Loudon and Hampshire railway, between Alexandria and Vienna, having been
conveyed to General McDowell, he dispatched the First Ohio regiment,
Colonel McCook, under the direction of Brigadier-General Schenck, to
guard the road.

The train of seven cars, backed out by a locomotive, left Alexandria
about noon, and proceeded on its way, dropping detachments all along the
road, and meeting with no interruptions until entering a straight line
near Vienna. Then a man stepped out upon the road and waved his hand,
beckoning the train to stop, and warned them “for God’s sake not to go
on,” as they were dead men if they proceeded; that there was a battery
and strong force of the enemy ahead.

The officer in front of the Federal troops paused a moment with his hand
on his forehead, as if turning the matter over in his mind, and then
beckoned to the engineer to go on.

They proceeded a short distance, when a battery on the high ground, to
the right of the road leading to Vienna, opened fire upon the train, and
poured well-aimed and rapid discharges into the compact body of Federal
soldiery. Some four hundred passengers, troops and laborers, were on the
train, and many of them were necessarily on the platforms and the
tender. The fire of the enemy, which seemed to be more especially
directed in the start to disabling the engine, was particularly
destructive amongst the men huddled upon the tender.

A number were killed and wounded here upon the first discharge. A
destructive fire was also poured upon the troops as they leaped from the
cars. The engine was struck by a six-pound shot upon a wheel-box, and
next upon the cylinder of the engine, which it fractured. The engineer,
finding that his engine was in danger, detached it (with one car) from
the train, and started back to Alexandria.

Fearful, indeed, was the effect of this deadly storm of fire and iron
hail upon the soldiers, helplessly confined, closely packed in the cars.
The slaughter intended for them was a species of murder, for, like sheep
in the shambles, they were completely in the power of their enemies.
Vain was the strong arm, vain was courage and heroism then. Vain the
good cause and the longing for victory, or, at least, a soldier’s death.
Confined within narrow limits, and crowded upon each other, the deadly
shot was poured in upon them. It was an hour in which the stoutest heart
might have trembled, and yet the men of the North met the iron death
manfully. Taken completely by surprise, suffering under every
disadvantage, they yet made a good stand. With desperate courage they
leaped from the riddled cars and coolly formed into line.

Finding the enemy’s batteries strongly posted and supported by cavalry
and infantry, they could not hope to carry them until reinforced, and
withdrew to the cover of a neighboring wood, carrying with them,
however, their dead and wounded.

The enemy’s force, estimated at 1,000 to 1,200 strong, had evidently
moved down from Fairfax Court-House the preceding night.

Ayre Hill, where the batteries were stationed, is a very commanding
point, and is, perhaps, the highest ground in Fairfax County. The
purpose of the enemy was evidently to get the cars with the Federal
troops on the straight line of the road before opening their murderous
fire. There were three six-pound guns in the battery.

The Ohio companies behaved with much credit in their unpleasant
position, and General Schenck, particularly, displayed perfect coolness
and self-possession. There had been undoubtedly a lack of forethought in
neglecting to send scouts in advance, as the country is favorable to
such reconnoitering; but when once in the difficulty, both men and
officers acted bravely.

They kept undisputed possession of the point where they had posted
themselves, the enemy not deeming it prudent to follow up the attack,
but contented themselves with burning the cars, although, with greatly
superior numbers, they might easily have captured the entire Federal
force.

A loss of eight killed and twelve wounded on the part of the Federalists
was the sequel to the sad and disastrous transaction, and when the
Sixty-ninth New York advanced to Vienna the next day, no trace could be
found of the enemy. The place was deserted, and silence reigned where
the little band of men had been so nearly sacrificed.




                         REVIEW AT WASHINGTON.


A few days before the army of the Potomac was to make its advance,
thirty thousand new troops passed through Washington, and were reviewed
by the President and his Cabinet. A stand had been erected in front of
the White House, in full view of Jackson’s monument, on which Lincoln,
Seward, Chase, and other members of the Cabinet sat while these troops
passed them in review. Eloquent speeches were made, and the most
unbounded confidence expressed in the soldiers’ ability to win a
glorious victory over the enemy whenever they should meet him in the
open field.

The troops listened with interest, and answered these glowing
predictions with enthusiastic shouts, as they passed away from the
parade ground and marched in solid columns across the Long Bridge that
spans the Potomac, there to share a destiny far different to the
promised glory, on the battle field of Manassas.

Another imposing ceremony was witnessed in Washington on the afternoon
of the review. A flag was to be raised on a staff near the Treasury
Department, and this was a kind of work that Lincoln loved to accomplish
with his own hands; so he moved with his Cabinet down to the point of
operation.

A platform had been erected at the foot of the flagstaff, and when the
President took his place upon it, thousands and thousands of loyal
citizens gathered around to see the glorious bunting hoisted in mid-air.

It was an imposing sight when the President’s tall figure appeared
standing in the midst of his councilors, with the halyards in his hands,
ready to send the stars and stripes aloft. With his hand uplifted and
his face raised toward the sky, he ran the flag up, and saw it catch the
wind and float slowly out between him and the blue sky. He stood looking
at it a moment, then turned his bright, earnest eyes upon the uplifted
faces of the crowd. “My friends,” he said, in a clear, full voice, “it
is an easy thing for me to run this flag up to the top of the staff, but
it will take the whole nation to keep it there.”

A shout rang up from the multitude, one of those wild, impulsive echoes
of a thousand hearts, which bespeak the enthusiasm of untried strength.
It seemed an easy thing to the people, with the tramp of those twenty
thousand new troops in their ears, to keep thousands of star-spangled
banners skyward; but before many days had passed, the rush of fugitive
feet, as they fled along those very pavements, proved how prophetic that
simple speech of President Lincoln’s was.

But even then the armies on the opposite banks of the Potomac were
mustering in force, for it had been decided that an advance should be
made and a battle fought, which it was hoped would decide a war which no
one expected to be of long duration. Many of these new troops passed
from that Washington review, and were swallowed up by the grand army
without having been inspected by the commanding General, who afterward
considered this fact one cause of his defeat. But the nation was eager
for action; a portion of the press fiercely urgent for a forward
movement; the two houses of Congress impatient of delay; so, all
unprepared, General Scott ordered the advance, against his own judgment,
to appease the general clamor.




                       ADVANCE OF THE GRAND ARMY.


From the time of the President’s proclamation calling for troops until
the 12th of July, immediately preceding the advance of the Grand Army
under General McDowell, to attack the rebel forces at Bull Run, the time
had been industriously employed in preparation. Fortifications had been
erected on the north side of the Potomac, at eight or ten points within
a radius of three miles from Washington and Georgetown. No military
force of the rebels was then known to exist on the Maryland shore; but
from Mount Vernon to the mouth of the Chesapeake on the south, and from
the Chain Bridge to the junction of the Shenandoah at Harper’s Ferry on
the north, they held undisputed possession.

General Patterson had crossed the Potomac early in July, with a force of
thirty thousand men, and was encamped at Martinsburgh, on the 12th,
having instructions from the Commander-in-chief to hold the rebel army
under General Johnston in check, should he attempt to move forward to
Manassas for the purpose of reinforcing Beauregard’s command at that
point. Johnston was at Winchester, on the direct route to Manassas Gap,
twenty-five miles from Martinsburgh, and it was a matter of vital
importance that he should be prevented from making a further advance.

The entire marching force of General McDowell was but about fifty-five
thousand, while twenty thousand were left as a reserve at Washington and
vicinity, under the command of General Mansfield.

And thus the combatants stood, when a day of fearful, bloody ending
dawned upon them—a day almost without a parallel in the world’s history
for deeds of daring and stubborn endurance, unflinching bravery, and
wild panic.

Manassas was selected by the Confederates on account of its controlling
position. Nature had done very much towards rendering it a second
Gibraltar, and art had completed the work. The country around was wild
and broken, with but few roads fit for the movements of an army, and
those easily guarded. Centreville was twenty-two miles distant from
Washington, and Manassas Junction six or seven more. About midway
between the two flowed the little rivulet of Bull Run, in a general
direction from north-west to south-east. A road led from Centreville to
the Junction, crossing the Run three miles from that place, at
“Blackburn’s Ford,” while a turnpike running towards Warrenton, also
crossed Bull Run at Stone Bridge, four miles distant. Somewhat east of
south, a country road from Centreville crossed Bull Run, and the
railroad at “Union Mills.”

The Confederate force was distributed along the Run from Union Mills to
the Stone Bridge, with reserves and a strongly fortified position near
the junction.

The array of General McDowell, when it marched to attack that position,
numbered about 30,000 men, consisting, with the exception of 700 or 800
regular troops, of raw volunteers, none of whom had been under military
discipline more than two or three months. Added to this must be
remembered the fact that, within three days, ten thousand of the number
would have a right to claim their dismissal, as their term of enlistment
(three months) would then expire. An army, consequently, less prepared
to march to the attack of a strongly fortified position it would have
been difficult to assemble; and this was rendered more fatal in its
effects from the fact that the officers, with the exception of a few who
had fought in the Mexican war, were unused to actual fighting, and
almost totally unacquainted with their different commands.

Under these unpromising auspices, the army marched from the banks of the
Potomac on the afternoon of July 16th. It advanced in four columns,
toiling along under the burning sun and over the hot ground. One by the
turnpike, one on the right, and one on the left of the railroad, and
another between the turnpike and railroad. Expecting to encounter the
enemy at Fairfax Court-House, seven miles this side of Centreville,
where they had thrown up intrenchments, the three columns were directed
to coöperate at that point. But the place was entered about noon on the
17th, only to find the intrenchments abandoned and signs of a hasty
retreat visible.

[Illustration: [Map]]

[Illustration: [Map]]

On the morning of the 18th, the different columns commenced their march
from Fairfax to Centreville. While General McDowell made a personal
reconnoissance to the left, making the forward movement a mere
demonstration, Major J. G. Barnard, chief-engineer of the staff,
proceeded to examine the enemy’s position in front. In this, however, he
had been anticipated by General Tyler, who had pushed a brigade on
towards Blackburn’s Ford. Troops were in motion on the plateau of
Manassas, moving up to reinforce the enemy’s lines, and though no attack
had been intended by the commanding general at that particular point,
they opened upon them with two twenty-pounder guns in hope of
ascertaining the position of these batteries. A reply was soon
obtained—a battery, invisible except by the smoke, poured forth rapid
discharges, and it required the assistance of a battery of rifled
six-pounders to enable the Union troops to silence it. The brigade was
then filed down to the stream and skirmishing maintained for some time.
This battle, though apparently of small importance, was disastrous,
inasmuch as it disorganized the arrangements of the commander-in-chief,
and was accompanied by great loss of life, when compared with the
magnitude of the undertaking and any beneficial result that could have
sprung from it. The possibility of charging into Manassas, even under
the most fortunate circumstances, was so remote, that the wisdom of an
action at that point and at that time has been gravely questioned by the
best military authorities. That night the columns of the army united,
and encamped about a mile in the rear of Fairfax Court House, upon a
broad hill-side, and on the extended plain at its base. A stream of
water which crossed the grounds rendered the spot peculiarly important
to the soldiers.

The next day was spent in reconnoitering, and in determining how and
where an attack should be made. The Stone Bridge was guarded by
batteries, and the ground beyond obstructed by formidable abattis. The
roads leading to fords between Blackburn’s and the Stone Bridge were
mere by-paths, and the opposite bank of the stream steep, tangled, and
obstructed. Two miles above, however, there was a good ford, but
slightly guarded, at Sudley’s Spring.

On these data the plan of attack was based, as follows: One division,
under Colonel Miles, to make, with one of its brigades, a false attack
on Blackburn’s Ford; another division (Tyler’s) to move up the turnpike
to the Stone Bridge and threaten that point, and at the proper time
carry it, and unite with the principal column, which consisted of
Hunter’s and Heintzelman’s divisions; then by a flank movement reach the
Sudley Ford, and descending the right bank of the stream, take the
defences in the rear of Stone Bridge, and give battle with the united
force, strike at the enemy’s railroad communication, or otherwise, as
circumstances should dictate.




                        THE BATTLE OF BULL RUN.


Bull Run, that once unknown name, is marked with great crimson letters
upon the scroll of time! Tears wrung from the anguished soul, tears hot
and blinding, still fall at the mere mention of its ill-omened name. A
nation’s _miserere_ has been tolled from uncounted steeples over its
dead, and a whole nation put on weeds of mourning when its battle cloud
spread slowly over the land, filling it with gloom.

With bayonets for pens, and precious human blood for ink, the record of
this first great battle of the Union War should be written in the
history of the world;—the ensanguined page illuminated with iron hail
and leaden sleet—with hissing shot—whirlwinds of death-missiles, and the
fire-belching portals of masked batteries. O, day of doom, day of sad
errors and illustrious deeds, when blood was poured forth like water,
until the reeking earth shuddered as it drank in the crimson deluge!
Generations shall hereafter look back on thee with painful wonder, for
they will remember that the first pitched battle in which Americans met
Americans in mortal strife, was fought on thy soil, beneath “the bloody
sun at noon.”

On the morning of the 21st, McDowell’s forces were encamped in and
around Centreville. The divisions were under orders to march at
half-past two o’clock, that they might reach the ground early and avoid
the heat. Before this time the encampments were in motion; but the
troops were not yet sufficiently disciplined for the exigencies of a
prompt march, and some delay arose with the first division in getting
out of camp. Thus the road was obstructed, and other divisions thrown
two hours out of time. But there was no lack of energy or zeal; the very
want of discipline which caused delay rendered the scenes in the various
encampments more grand and imposing. It was indeed a beautiful
spectacle. A lovely moonlight flooded the whole country. Soft mists lay
in the valleys—the hill-tops were studded for miles around by the
camp-fires which thirty regiments had left, kindling the landscape with
their star-like gleams. In the hollows, along the level grounds, and
among the trees, thousands on thousands of armed men moved athwart the
fires, harnessing horses to artillery, getting out army wagons,
preparing ambulances and filling haversacks with the three days’ rations
ordered for their subsistence. No man of all that vast host was
idle—want of order there might have been, but no lack of energy.

Now, thirty thousand men, horses, ordnance and wagons, were all in
place, ready for a march through the beautiful night, and under that
serene moon, which many of them would never look upon again.

McDowell and his staff moved with the first—Tyler’s—central column, and
the advance commenced. The picturesque encampments were soon left
behind; the fires grew paler and twinkled out in a glow of mist; the
tents dwindled into littleness, till they seemed more like great flocks
of white-plumaged birds, nestled in the foliage, than the paraphernalia
of war. Nothing could be more quiet and peaceful than the country the
troops had left—nothing more solemnly grand than the advance. It was an
army of Americans, marching through the still night to meet Americans
for the first time in a great pitched battle. Nothing but holy
patriotism and a stern sense of duty could have led these men into the
field. They marched on, with thousands of bayonets gleaming in the
moonlight, and casting long-pointed shadows over the path; staff
officers formed imposing groups as they moved forward in the moonlight,
casting pictures upon the earth that were like broken battle scenes.

In the ranks there was something more than stern courage; generous
enthusiasm and honest emulation were eloquent there. Comrade greeted
comrade, for the coming danger made friends brothers; and common
acquaintances fell into affectionate intimacy. Many a touching message
was exchanged between men who had never met out of the ranks, for while
they panted for victory, each man prepared to earn it with his life.

These men knew that a terrible day’s fighting lay before them; but the
previous defeat of Thursday rankled in their proud hearts, and each man
felt it as an individual reproach which must be swept away. From the
central column to the rear, this feeling prevailed among the men.

The troops of the old Bay State, of Rhode Island, Connecticut, and New
York, entered into a spirit of generous rivalry. Ohio, Michigan,
Wisconsin and Minnesota entered the list with true Western fervor, while
the rich Celtic humor rose in fun and pathos from the Irish troops.

The officers shared this enthusiasm with their men. Tyler moved on,
burning to atone for his noble rashness at Blackburn’s Ford—Burnside,
Corcoran, Keyes, Spidel, Meagher, and many another noble fellow, thought
exultingly of the laurels to be gathered on the morrow. General
McDowell’s carriage halted at the two roads, a spot that he deemed most
convenient for receiving despatches from the various points of the
battle-field.

Here the column of General Hunter diverged from the main body and went
away through the moonlit country on its assigned duty, which led him
around the enemy’s flank by a long and harassing route. With him went
Heintzelman, Porter, Burnside and Sprague with their valiant Rhode
Islanders, and Wilcox, that bravest of young men and most brilliant
author, who met a fate almost worse than death in the hottest of the
coming battle. There, too, was Slocum, Haggerty, and many another
valiant fellow, marching forward to a glorious death. Each and all of
these, with their regiments or brigades, swept to the right, to meet
their comrades again in the hottest of the battle.

A mile from the Cross Roads, and the dawn of a bright July day broke
pleasantly on the moving troops—a morning cool with dew, fresh with
verdure, and tranquil and peaceful, save for the armed men that made the
earth tremble under their solid tread as they moved over it. The mists
of a dewy night were slowly uplifted, and beautiful reaches of the
country were revealed. On the left was the station assigned to
Richardson and Davies; beyond it, the valley which one unfortunate
conflict had so lately stained with blood.

When Tyler’s division came to the edge of a wooded hill overlooking
these scenes, the sun arose, flooding them with rosy splendor. The
soldiers knew, but could not realize that this scene, so beautiful and
tranquil, had been a field of carnage, and would, before that sun went
down, be red with the blood of many a brave heart beating among them
then. They knew well that in a brief time the pure atmosphere, which it
was now a joy to breathe, would be heavy with stifling smoke; that the
noble forests whose leaves trembled so pleasantly in the newborn
sunshine, were but a concealment for masked batteries—fearful engines of
destruction, and men more ravenous for their lives than the wild animals
that civilization had driven away from them.

From the point of view just described, where the road falls gently down
to a ravine, the enemy first appeared. A line of infantry was drawn up
in a distant meadow, close upon a back-ground of woods.

The second and third regiments of Tyler’s brigade, under Schenck, was at
once formed into line in the woods on either side, the First Ohio,
Second Wisconsin, Seventy-ninth, Thirteenth, and Sixty-ninth New York
regiments succeeding each other on the right, and the Second Ohio and
Second New York being similarly placed on the left, while the artillery
came down the road between.

A great 32-pound rifled Parrott gun—the only one of its calibre in the
field service—was brought forward, and made to bear on the point where
the bayonets of the enemy had suddenly disappeared in the woods, and a
shell was fired at fifteen minutes past six A. M., which burst in the
air; but the report of the piece awoke the country for leagues around to
a sense of what that awful day would prove. The reverberation was
tremendous, and the roar of the revolving shell indescribable.
Throughout the battle that gun, whenever it was fired, seemed to hush
and overpower everything else. No answering salute came back, so the
32-pounder sent a second shell at a hill-top, two miles off, where it
was suspected that a battery had been planted by the rebels.

The bomb burst close at the intended point, but no answer came. General
Tyler ordered Carlisle to cease firing, and bring the rest of his
battery to the front of the woods and get the column ready for instant
action.

Tyler’s position was before the valley of Bull Run, but the descent was
gradual, and surrounded by thick woods down almost to the ravine through
which the stream flows. The enemy, on the contrary, had cleared away all
the obstructing foliage, and bared the earth in every direction over
which they could bring their artillery upon the Union forces. Clumps of
trees and bushes remained wherever their earthworks and other concealed
defences could be advantageously planted among them. The ground on their
side was vastly superior to that of the assailants. It rose in gradual
slopes to great heights, but was broken into hills and terraces in many
places, upon which strong earthworks were planted, some openly, but the
greater portion concealed. Nature had supplied positions of defence
which needed but little labor to render them desperately formidable. How
thoroughly these advantages had been improved was established by the
almost superhuman efforts which were required to dislodge their troops,
and by the obstinate opposition which they displayed before retiring
from one strong point to another. It was now about seven o’clock—for an
hour everything was silent. At eight, the deep sullen boom of
Richardson’s and Davies’ batteries at Blackburn’s Ford broke the
stillness, and from that quarter constant cannonading was kept up for
some time.

By this time scouts reported the enemy in some force on the left. Two or
three Ohio skirmishers had been killed. Carlisle’s battery was sent to
the front of the woods on the right, where it could be brought to play
when needed. A few shells were thrown into the opposite thicket, and
then the Second Ohio and Second New York marched down to rout the enemy
from their hiding places. As they rushed toward a thickly-covered abatis
on the banks of the Run, the rebels came swarming out like bees, and
fled to the next fortification beyond.

General Schenck’s brigade was moved forward to the left, but half way to
the Run met the full fire of a masked battery effectually concealed by
the bushes.

A few dead and wounded began to be brought in, and the battle of
Manassas had commenced. Carlisle’s howitzers and the great rifled gun
were opened in the direction of the battery, which answered promptly,
and a brief but terrific cannonading ensued. In less than half an hour
the enemy’s guns were silenced, two of Carlisle’s howitzers advancing
through the woods to gain a closer position, and Schenck’s brigade
retired to its first lines.

At eleven o’clock, the artillery, which resounded from every portion of
the field, extending from Davies and Richardson’s position on the
extreme left, to the right near Sudley, gave startling evidence that
Hunter was making his way around the enemy. The roll and thunder was
incessant—great volumes of smoke surged over the vast field, impaling it
in the distance, and making the air around the near batteries thick with
smoke.

It was true, Hunter’s and Heintzelman’s columns had taken the field on
the extreme right.

McDowell in his plan of battle had calculated that the marching colunm
should diverge from the turnpike by early daylight (a night march being
deemed imprudent), and reach Sudley Ford by six or seven, A. M. The
Stone Bridge division did not clear the road over which both, for a
certain distance, had to pass, so that the column could take up its
march, until after the time. The route to Sudley proved far longer and
more difficult than was anticipated. The column did not reach the Sudley
Ford till near half-past nine, three or four hours “behind time.” When
it reached the ford, the heads of the enemy’s columns were visible on
the march to meet it.

The ground between the stream and the road, leading from Sudley south,
was for about a mile thickly wooded; on the right, for the same
distance, divided between fields and timber. A mile from the ford the
country on both sides of the road is open, and for a mile further large,
irregular fields extend to the turnpike, which, after crossing Bull Run
at the “Stone Bridge,” passes what became the field of battle, through
the valley of a small tributary of the Run.

But, notwithstanding a fearful march over broken grounds in the hot sun,
with his men suffering from heat and thirst, Hunter had reached his
point of operation, late it is true, but from no fault of his. The weary
soldiers uttered exclamations of joy when they saw the limpid waters of
the Run, and plunging into its current bathed their hot hands and
burning faces as they waded through, and came out on the other side
greatly invigorated. While his thirty men were refreshing themselves
with cool draughts of water, Hunter sent a courier to General McDowell,
reporting that he had safely crossed the Run.

The General was lying on the ground, having been ill during the night,
but at once mounted his horse and rode on to join the column on which so
much depended.

The halt had not lasted two minutes when Col. Burnside led his different
regiments into their position on the field. The Second Rhode Island
entered first to the extreme right; then the Rhode Island battery of six
pieces, and two howitzers of the Seventy-first, and after it on the
left, the First Rhode Island and the Second New Hampshire, all formed in
line of battle on the top of the hill.

Shortly after the leading regiment of the first brigade reached the open
space, and whilst others and the second brigade were crossing to the
front and right, the enemy opened his fire, beginning with artillery,
and following it up with infantry. The leading brigade (Burnside’s) had
to sustain this shock for a short time without support, and met it
bravely. Gov. Sprague himself directed the movements of the Rhode Island
brigade, and was conspicuous through the day for gallantry. The enemy
were found in heavy numbers opposite this noble brigade of our army, and
greeted it with shell and long volleys of battalion firing as it
advanced. But on it went, and a fierce conflict now commenced.

The enemy clung to the protecting wood with tenacity, and the Rhode
Island battery became so much endangered as to impel the commander of
the second brigade to call for the assistance of the battalion of
regulars. At this time news ran through the lines that Colonel Hunter
was seriously wounded. Porter took command of his division; and, in
reply to the urgent request of Colonel Burnside, detached the battalion
of regulars to his assistance, followed shortly afterwards by the New
Hampshire regiments. Shortly afterward the other corps of Porter’s
brigade, and a regiment detached from Heintzelman’s division to the
left, emerged from the timber, where some hasty disposition of
skirmishers had been made at the head of the column, in which Colonel
Slocum, of the Second Rhode Island regiment, distinguished himself for
great activity.

The rattle of musketry and crash of round shot through the leaves and
branches, had warned them when the action commenced, and the column
moved forward before these preliminaries were completed, eager for a
share in the fight.

The head of Porter’s brigade was immediately turned a little to the
right, in order to gain time and room for deployment on the right of the
second brigade. Griffin’s battery found its way through the timber to
the fields beyond, followed promptly by the marines, while the
Twenty-Seventh took direction more to the left, and the Fourteenth
followed upon the trail of the battery—all moving up at a double-quick
step. At this time General McDowell with his staff rode through the
lines and was loudly cheered as they passed within six hundred feet of
the enemy’s line.

The enemy appeared drawn up in a long line, extending along the
Warrenton turnpike, from a house and haystack upon their extreme right,
to a house beyond the left of the division. Behind that house there was
a heavy masked battery, which, with three others along his line, on the
heights beyond, covered the ground through which the troops were
advancing with all sorts of projectiles. A grove, in front of Porter’s
right wing, afforded it shelter and protection, while the underbrush
along the road in the fences, screened to some extent his left wing.

Griffin advanced to within one thousand yards, and opened a deadly fire
upon these batteries, which were soon silenced or driven away.

The right was rapidly developed by the marines, Twenty-Seventh,
Fourteenth, and Eighth, with the cavalry in rear of the right; the enemy
retreating in more precipitation than order as the line advanced. The
second brigade (Burnside’s) was at this time attacking the enemy’s right
with great vigor.

The rebels soon came flying from the woods toward the right, and the
Twenty-Seventh completed their rout by charging directly upon their
centre in face of a scorching fire, while the Fourteenth and Eighth
moved down the turnpike to cut off the retiring foe, and to support the
Twenty-Seventh, which had lost its gallant Colonel, but was standing the
brunt of the action, though its ranks were terribly thinned in the
dreadful fire. Now the resistance of the enemy’s left was so obstinate
that the beaten right retired in safety.

The head of Heintzelman’s column at this moment appeared upon the field,
and the Eleventh and Fifth Massachusetts regiments moved forward to
support the centre, while staff officers could be seen galloping rapidly
in every direction, endeavoring to rally the broken Eighth, but with
little success.

The Fourteenth, though it had broken, was soon rallied in rear of
Griffin’s battery, which took up a position further to the front and
right, from which his fire was delivered with such precision and
rapidity as to compel the batteries of the enemy to retire in
consternation far behind the brow of the hill in front.

At this time Porter’s brigade occupied a line considerably in advance of
that first occupied by the left wing of the rebels. The battery was
pouring its withering fire into the batteries and columns of the enemy
wherever they exposed themselves. The cavalry were engaged in feeling
the left flank of the enemy’s position, in doing which some important
captures were made, one by Sergeant Socks, of the Second Dragoons, of a
General George Stewart, of Baltimore. The cavalry also did brave
service.

General Tyler’s division was engaged with the enemy’s right. The
Twenty-Seventh was resting on the edge of the woods in the centre,
covered by a hill upon which lay the Eleventh and Fifth Massachusetts,
occasionally delivering a scattering fire. The Fourteenth was moving to
the right flank, the Eighth had lost its organization, the marines were
moving up in fine style in the rear of the Fourteenth, and Captain
Arnold was occupying a height in the middle ground with his battery. At
this juncture there was a temporary lull in the firing from the rebels,
who appeared only now and then on the heights in irregular masses, but
to serve as marks for Griffin’s guns. The prestige of success had thus
far attended the efforts of the inexperienced but gallant Union troops.
The lines of the enemy had been forcibly shifted nearly a mile to their
left and rear. The flags of eight regiments, though borne somewhat
wearily, now pointed toward the hill from which disordered masses of the
rebels had been seen hastily retiring.

Rickett’s battery, together with Griffith’s battery, on the side of the
hill, had been objects of the special attention of the enemy, who had
succeeded in disabling Rickett’s battery, and then attempted to take it.
Three times was he repulsed by different corps in succession, and driven
back, and the guns taken by hand, the horses being killed, and pulled
away. The third time the repulse seemed to be final, for he was driven
entirely from the hill, and so far beyond it as not to be in sight. He
had before this been driven nearly a mile and a half, and was beyond the
Warrenton road, which was entirely in Federal possession, from the Stone
Bridge westward. The engineers were just completing the removal of the
abatis across the road, to allow reinforcements (Schenck’s brigade and
Ayers’ battery) to join in. The enemy was evidently disheartened and
broken.

But at this moment, when everything pointed to a speedy victory, orders
came through Major Barry of the Fifth artillery, for Griffin’s battery
to move from the hill upon which the house stood, to the top of a hill
on the right, with the “Fire Zouaves” and marines, while the Fourteenth
entered the skirt of wood on their right, to protect that flank, and a
column, composed of the Twenty-seventh New York, Eleventh and Fifth
Massachusetts, Second Minnesota, and Sixty-Ninth New York, moved up
toward the left batteries. It had taken position, but before the
flanking supports had reached theirs, a murderous fire of musketry and
rifles opened at pistol range, cutting down every cannonier, and a large
number of horses. The fire came from some infantry of the enemy, which
had been mistaken for Union forces; an officer in the field having
stated that it was a regiment sent by Colonel Heintzelman to support the
batteries.

As soon as the Zouaves came up, they were led forward against an Alabama
regiment, partly concealed in a clump of small pines in an old field.

After a severe fire they broke, and the greatest portion of them fell to
the rear, keeping up a desultory firing over the heads of their comrades
in front; at the same moment they were charged by a company of rebel
cavalry on their rear, who came by a road through two strips of woods on
the extreme right. The fire of the Zouaves dispersed them. The
discomfiture of this cavalry was completed by a fire from Captain
Colburn’s company of United States cavalry, which killed and wounded
several men. Colonel Farnham, with some of his officers and men, behaved
gallantly, and many of his men did good service as skirmishers later in
the day. General Heintzelman then led up the Minnesota regiment, which
was also repulsed, but retired in tolerably good order. It did good
service in the woods on the right flank, and was among the last to
retire, moving off the field with the Third United States infantry. Next
was led forward the First Michigan, which was also repulsed, and retired
in considerable confusion. They were rallied, and helped to hold the
woods on the right. The Brooklyn Fourteenth then appeared on the ground,
coming forward in gallant style. They were led forward to the left,
where the Alabama regiment had been posted in the early part of the
action, but had now disappeared, and soon came in sight of the line of
the enemy drawn up beyond the clump of trees. Soon after the firing
commenced, the regiment broke and retired. It was useless to attempt a
rally. The want of discipline in these regiments was so great that the
most of the men would run from fifty to several hundred yards in the
rear, and continue to fire, compelling those in front to retreat.

During this time Rickett’s battery had been captured and retaken three
times by Heintzelman’s forces, but was finally lost, most of the horses
having been killed—Captain Ricketts being wounded, and First Lieutenant
D. Ramsay killed. Lieutenant Kirby behaved gallantly, and succeeded in
carrying off one caisson. Before this time, heavy reinforcements of the
enemy were distinctly seen approaching by two roads, extending and
outflanking Heintzelman on the right. General Howard’s brigade came on
the field at this time, having been detained by the General as a
reserve. It took post on a hill on Heintzelman’s right and rear, and for
some time gallantly held the enemy in check. One company of cavalry
attached to Heintzelman’s division, was joined, during the engagement,
by the cavalry of Colonel Hunter’s division, under the command of Major
Palmer.

Colonel W. B. Franklin commanded the first brigade of Heintzelman’s
division. A portion of that brigade rendered distinguished service, and
received official commendation from the commanding general.

General Tyler, who kept his position at the Stone Bridge, to menace that
point, and at the proper moment to carry it and unite with the turning
column, had sent forward the right wing of his command to co-operate
with Hunter as soon as he was discovered making his way on the flank.

Two brigades (Sherman’s and Keyes’) of that division had passed the Run.
Colonel Sherman joined himself to the divisions of Hunter and
Heintzelman, and was soon engaged in the hottest part of the action.

The famous Irish regiment, 1,600 strong, who have had so much of the
hard digging to perform, claimed the honor of a share in the hard
fighting, and led the van of Tyler’s attack, followed by the
Seventy-ninth (Highlanders), and Thirteenth New York, and the Second
Wisconsin.

It was a brave sight—that rush of the Sixty-ninth into the
death-struggle—with such cheers as proved a hearty love of the work
before them! With a quick step at first, and then a double-quick, and at
last a run, they dashed forward and along the edge of the extended
forest. Coats and knapsacks were thrown to either side, that nothing
might impede their work. It was certain that no guns would slip from the
hands of those determined fellows, even if dying agonies were needed to
close them with a firmer grasp. As the line swept along, Meagher
galloped toward the head, crying, “Come on, boys! you’ve got your chance
at last!”

[Illustration:

  BRILLIANT CHARGE ON A REBEL BATTERY.
]

Sherman’s brigade thus moved forward for half a mile, describing quite
one-fourth of a circle on the right, Colonel Quimby’s regiment in front,
the other regiments following in line of battle—the Wisconsin Second,
New York Seventy-ninth, and New York Sixty-ninth in succession. Quimby’s
regiment advanced steadily up the hill and opened fire on the enemy, who
had made a stand. The regiment continued advancing as the enemy gave
way, till the head of his column reached the point where Rickett’s
battery had been cut up. The other regiments followed under a fearful
cannonading. At the point where the road crossed the ridge to the left,
the ground was swept by a fire of artillery, rifles, and musketry.
Regiment after regiment were driven from it, following the Zouaves and a
battalion of marines.

When the Wisconsin Second was abreast of the enemy, it was ordered to
leave the roadway and attack him. This regiment ascended the hill, was
met with a sharp fire, returned it gallantly, and advanced, delivering
its fire. But the response was terrific, and the regiment fled in
confusion toward the road. It rallied again, passed the brow of the hill
a second time, and was again repulsed in disorder. By this time the New
York Seventy-ninth had closed up. It was impossible to get a good view
of the ground. In it there was one battery of artillery, which poured an
incessant fire upon the advancing column, and the ground was irregular,
with small clusters of pines, which afforded shelter to the enemy. The
fire of rifles and musketry grew hotter and hotter. The Seventy-ninth,
headed by Colonel Cameron, charged across the hill, and for a short time
the contest was terrible. They rallied several times under fire, but
finally broke and gained the cover of the hill.

This left the field open to the New York Sixty-ninth, Colonel Corcoran,
who, in his turn, led his regiment over the crest, and had in full open
view the ground so severely contested. The firing was terrific, the roar
of cannon, musketry, and rifles, incessant. The enemy was here in
immense force. The Sixty-ninth held the ground for some time with
desperate courage, but finally fell back in disorder.

At this time Quimby’s regiment occupied another ridge to the left,
overlooking the same field, fiercely engaged. Colonel Keyes, from
Tyler’s division, had formed in line with Sherman’s brigade, and came
into conflict on its right with the enemy’s cavalry and infantry, which
he drove back. The further march of the brigade was arrested by a severe
fire of artillery and infantry, sheltered by Robinson’s house, standing
on the heights above the road leading to Bull Run. The charge was here
ordered, and the Second Maine and Third Connecticut regiments pressed
forward to the top of the hill, reached the buildings which were held by
the enemy, drove them out, and for a moment had them in possession. At
this point, finding the brigade under the fire of a strong force behind
breastworks, the order was given to march by the left flank, with a view
to turn the battery which the enemy had placed on the hill below the
point at which the Warrenton turnpike crosses Bull Run. The march was
conducted for a considerable distance below the Stone Bridge, causing
the enemy to retire, and giving Captain Alexander an opportunity to pass
the bridge, cut out the abatis which had been placed there, and prepare
the way for Schenck’s brigade and the two batteries to pass over. Before
this movement could be made on the enemy’s battery, it was placed in a
new position; but Colonel Keyes carried his brigade, by a flank
movement, around the base of the hill, and was on the point of ascending
it in time to get at the battery, when he discovered that the troops
were on the retreat, and that, unless a rapid movement to the rear was
made, he would be cut off. At this moment, the abatis near the Stone
Bridge had been cleared away by Captain Alexander, of the engineers, and
Schenck’s brigade (the third of Tyler’s division) was about to pass over
and join Keyes.

But one rash movement had decided the day—that movement the last change
of position given to Griffin’s battery, throwing it helpless into a
murderous fire, which no protecting force could encounter.

When the Zouaves broke on that fatal hill, the Union cause for that day
wavered. When hordes of fresh troops poured in upon the Union
battalions, beating back as brave regiments as ever trod the
battle-field, one after another, overwhelming them with numbers, and
driving them headlong into utter confusion, the battle was lost; and
after this any description of it must be wild and turbulent as the scene
itself—in no other way can a true picture of the tumultuous fighting and
more tumultuous retreat be truly given.


                      THE CLIMAX AND THE RETREAT.

We have described the battle of Manassas, Stone Bridge, or Bull Run, as
it is variously called, in its plain details, giving each regiment, so
far as possible, its share in the glorious fight; for up to mid-day and
after, no braver fighting was ever done than the Union troops performed
on that 21st of July. Now a wilder, more difficult, and very painful
effort taxes the pen. The heat, turmoil and terrible storm of death
rolls up in a tumultuous picture—troops in masses—stormy action—the
confused rush of men—all these things have no detail, but hurl the
writer forward, excited and unrestrained as the scene to be described.

At high noon the battle raged in its widest circumference. The batteries
on the distant hills began to pour their volleys on the Union troops
with terrible effect. Carlisle’s and Sherman’s batteries answered with
tremendous emphasis, while the great 32-pounder hurled its iron
thunderbolts first into one of the enemy’s defences, then into another,
tearing up everything as they went. The noise of the cannonading grew
deafening, and kept up one incessant roll. Compared to it the sharp
volleys of riflemen were like the rattle of hail amid the loud bursts of
a thunder tempest. The people of Centreville, Fairfax, Alexandria, and
even Washington, heard the fearful reverberations, and trembled at the
sound.

Five powerful batteries were in operation at once, joined to the hiss
and hurtle of twenty thousand small arms! No wonder the sky turned
black, impaled with death-smoke—no wonder the sun shone fierce and red
upon the pools of warm human blood that began to gather around those
batteries, where the slain were lying in heaps and winrows!

Still amid this roar and carnage, the Federal forces were making sure
headway, and driving the enemy before them. Except one brigade of
Tyler’s division, the entire force of eighteen thousand men was in
fierce action. As the Union forces pressed upon the enemy, approaching
each moment to the completion of their plan of battle, the rebels grew
desperate. The batteries on the western hills poured forth their iron
tempest with accumulated fury. The Union guns answered them with fiercer
thunder. The roar of the cannonading was deafening, drowning the volleys
of riflemen, and sweeping off in one overpowering sound the rattle and
crash of musketry. The clamor of the guns was appalling—the rush and
tumult of action more appalling still. The whole valley was like a vast
volcano, boiling over with dust and smoke. Through this turbid
atmosphere battalions charged each other and batteries poured their hot
breath on the air, making it denser than before. Now and then the dust
would roll away from the plain, and the smoke float off from the hills,
revealing a dash of cavalry across some open space, or a charge of
infantry up to a fortified point where the struggle, success, or
repulse, was lost or vaguely seen through volumes of rolling
smoke—columns of ruddy dust trailed after the infantry, broken now and
then by the fiery track of a battery masked in foliage. A sullen report,
and horrid gaps appeared in what a moment before was a living wall of
men. A curl of blue vapor rose gracefully from the trees, and it was
only the dead bodies blackening the ground that made the sight so awful.

But the fight gathered fiercest on the westward hill, from which the
booming thunder rolled in long incessant peals. Its sides swarmed with
armed men, changing positions, charging and retreating. Curtains of
smoke, swayed by the wind, revealed the horses around a battery,
rearing, plunging and falling headlong, dozens together, in one hideous
death. Then in mercy the smoke drifted over the hill again. The enemy
were giving ground at every point. The Mississippians had fled in dismay
from the batteries, and desperately taken to the field in wavering
columns. Other regiments were actually fleeing before the Union troops,
but they were generally moving with sullen steadiness to the rear. The
entire line which arrayed itself against Tyler in the morning had been
relinquished, except one fortified elevation. Still their peculiar mode
of warfare was kept up. Masked batteries were constantly opening in
unexpected places, leaving heaps of slain in the track of their fiery
hail.

On the uplands whole regiments, seen from the distance, seemed to drive
against or drift by each other, leaving beautiful curls and clouds of
smoke behind; but under this smoke lay so many dead bodies that the soul
grew faint in counting them.

Through all this the Federal troops progressed toward a union of their
attacking columns. Tyler had already spoken to McDowell, and the two
forces were drawing nearer and nearer together. Victory appeared so
certain that nothing but a junction of the two columns was wanting to a
glorious result, and this now seemed inevitable.

The clamor of the artillery was checked for a little time on both sides.
Red-handed death cannot rush panting on the track forever. Black-mouthed
guns will get too foul for belching fire, and the swarthy men who feed
them must have breathing time. As the fight flagged, and the men paused
to draw breath, their terrible suffering was apparent in the parched
lips that had tasted water but once through all that hot day, and the
bloodshot eyes with which each man seemed to beseech his comrade for
drink which no one had to give. Still, with dry lips and throats full of
dust, they talked over a thousand details of valor performed on the
field. They spoke sadly of the loss of brave Cameron, the wounding of
Hunter, the fall of Haggerty and Slocum, the doubtful fate of noble
young Wilcox. They discussed the impetuous dash and resolute stand of
the Irishmen, the murderous shock sustained by the Rhode Island
regiments, how the Hignlanders had done justice to their own warlike
traditions, and the Connecticut Third had crowned its State with honors.
They told how Heintzelman had stooped down from his war-horse to have
his wounded wrist bound up, refusing to dismount—of the intrepid
Burnside, and of Sprague, the patriotic young Governor, who led on the
forces his generosity had raised, to one victorious charge after
another, till with his own hands he spiked the Rhode Island guns when
compelled to leave them to the enemy.

So tranquil was the field during this short period of rest, that the
soldiers who had foreborne to throw their rations away in the march,
unslung their haversacks and sat down upon the grass to share the
contents with their less prudent companions; those who had been
fortunate enough to pick up the enemy’s haversacks, cast off in retreat,
added their contents to the scanty store.

While a few thus snatched a mouthful of food, others climbed up the tall
trees and took a triumphant view of the vast battle-field their valor
had conquered. The scene of carnage which it presented was awful. Dead
and dying men heaped together on the red earth, crippled horses
struggling desperately in their death-throes, wounded men lying
helplessly on the grass to which they had been dragged from under the
hoofs of the war-chargers—all this grouped where the angry waves of
battle had rolled down the beautiful valley, with its back-ground of
mountains, looking immovable and grandly tranquil against the sky, was a
picture which no man who saw it will ever forget.

The army, far advanced within the enemy’s defensive lines, believing
itself victorious, was thus falling into quiet. The great struggle of
the contending forces, each to outflank the other, had ceased. The
prestige of success belonged to the Union, whose stars and stripes shone
out triumphantly as the smoke which had engulfed the combatants rolled
away.

All at once those in the tree-tops saw a commotion in the far distance.
Columns of troops were moving toward them with flashing bayonets, and
Southern banners, unfurling the stars and bars to the sun. On they
came—rank after rank, column after column, one continuous stream of
armed men, pouring down upon the battle-field with bursts of music and
wild shouts of enthusiasm.

It was Johnston’s reinforcements, marching up from the railroad. On they
rushed, fresh, vigorous, and burning with ardor, through masses of
wounded soldiers that lay by the road. The infantry broke from the
double-quick to a swift run—the cavalry rode in on a sharp gallop—the
artillery wagons were encircled with men eager to get their ordnance in
place against the thrice-exhausted Union troops. In a continuous stream
these columns swarmed into the woods, the greater force centering around
the hill about which the storm of battle had raged fiercest.

In an instant the whole battle commenced again. The officers sprang to
their guns, anxious but not appalled. The men fell into rank ready for a
new onset, tired as they were.

Then it was that Griffin’s battery changed position, and the Fire
Zouaves coming up under a terrible fire, broke and scattered down the
hill-side, but rallied again in broken masses to rescue Rickett’s
battery, dragging the guns off with their own hands from amid the pile
of dying horses that lay around them. Then it was that the Sixty-ninth
and Seventy-ninth New York swept through the meadows from the north
across the road, and charged up the hill with such daring courage,
resisting the shock of battle fifteen minutes, and breaking only when
mortal valor could withstand the storm of bullets no longer.

Then the bold Connecticut regiments charged up the hill. Thousands of
the impetuous enemy fell upon them, but in spite of all they planted the
star-spangled banner and sent its folds sweeping out from the crest of
the hill. Not till this was done, and a long last shout sent ringing
after the banner, were these heroic regiments driven from their
position. But beaten back at last, they retired step by step, fighting
as they went.

Then the Zouaves broke into the fight once more, scattered on the
ground, some prostrate on their faces, others with limbs huddled
together as if dead—while many stood with their eyes to the sun, waiting
the onset of the Black Horse cavalry that came galloping upon them from
the woods. A few of these eccentric warriors were making a feint of
defending themselves while the cavalry stood hesitating on the margin of
the wood, but the rest seemed to have been cut down by the sweep of some
deadly cannonade, and lay in the grass like a flock of partridge shot
down in full flight.

Out from the woody cover the Black Hawks thundered on, their arms
flashing and the jetty necks of their horses flinging off the sunshine.
The handful of Zouaves now flocked together in front of their prostrate
comrades, seeming doubtful whether to fight or flee. On the black
chargers came, champing the bit and tossing their heads angrily, the
riders ready to trample the scattered Zouaves under hoof, as too easy a
conquest for their flashing swords. A sudden, sharp ringing yell, and
the dead Zouaves sprang to life, confronting the horsemen in a wall of
bristling steel. A sharp volley—the horses reared, plunged, and ran back
upon each other, some falling dead with quivering limbs as the fatal
bullets rent their vitals, and gushes of blood crimsoned their
coal-black chests; others staggering from a dozen wounds, rushed madly
through the broken ranks of the terrified cavalry.

Before the chargers could again be brought into line, the Zouaves flung
away their rifles, and sprang like tigers upon them. Seizing them by the
bit, they wound themselves up over their arched necks—a flash of
bowie-knives gleamed like chain-lightning across the ranks, and many a
wild black horse plunged on riderless with burning eyes, streaming mane,
and ringing empty stirrups, headlong through the already
half-disorganized ranks, and scouring over the battle-field, scattering
dismay as they went.

A last struggle now ensued, with desperate men and broken forces—then a
retreat, so wild, so impetuous and reckless, that all organization was
given up. Regiments lost their officers, broke, mingled into others, and
rushed across the field a headlong torrent, which no human power could
arrest. On they went, plunging through the sea of carnage that
surrounded the hill—the surging, angry broken waves of a brave army
hurrying tumultuously from what had been a victorious field but an hour
before.

Down from the hills, broken into frightened masses, pallid, reeling with
exhaustion, they swept onward like a whirlwind, bearing the protesting
officers with them, or trampling them under foot; for human life was
nothing to them in that hot, mad race. The contagion of retreat spread
like a prairie fire, from one point of the battle-field to another,
scattering the army in wild confusion.

Still it was not quite a panic; two regiments, the Seventy-first New
York and Second Rhode Island, kept their ranks in all this confusion,
and were led in order from the field, over the road they had passed in
the morning. Other regiments were led off in a wild, scattered way, but
most of the great army was broken up, battalions and regiments surging
together, and dashing through each other, till they became one mighty
scene of confusion.

[Illustration:

  THE ENEMY LARGELY REINFORCED—DESPERATE FIGHTING OF THE UNION TROOPS
    AGAINST SUPERIOR NUMBERS.
]

The enemy pursued them in a broken, hesitating way, like men astonished
at their own success; wanting confidence, they did not venture in force
to follow the retreating army, but captured many of the scattered bands
dispersed over the wide field of conflict. One detachment of cavalry
charged on a helpless crowd of wounded, who were gathered near a
hospital building; when a handful of unorganized men, mostly civilians,
seized upon the first weapons at hand, and repelled it bravely.

Up to this time Schenck’s brigade had kept its position at Stone Bridge.
Captain Alexander, with his sappers and miners, had just cut through the
abatis by the side of the mined bridge, that Schenck might lead his
forces after those of Sherman and Keyes, when the torrent of retreat
rolled toward him; his protecting battery was taken, and a force of
cavalry and infantry came pouring into the road at the very spot where
the battle of the morning commenced.

The first battery attacked that day had been silenced, but not taken;
and there, in the woods which protected it, four hundred South
Carolinians had been concealed during the entire battle, to swarm out
now and fall upon the Union infantry in this most critical moment. A
sudden swoop of cavalry completed that unhappy day’s work. The Union
infantry broke ranks, and plunging into the woods fled up the hill. A
crowd of ambulances and army wagons had concentrated close to this spot,
and civilians, led to the field by curiosity, blocked up the ground. The
panic which had swept the battle-field seized on them. Kellogg of
Michigan, Washburne of Illinois, and it is said, Lovejoy of Illinois,
flung themselves in the midst of the fugitives, and entreated them to
make a stand. Ely, of New York, was taken prisoner in a rash effort to
restore confidence to the panic-stricken masses of men. But the maddened
crowd plunged on. The teamsters urged their frightened horses into a
headlong rush for the road; everything and everybody, brave or craven,
were swept forward by the irresistible human torrent. It was a stampede
which no power could check or resist. From the branch road the trains
attached to Hunter’s division had caught the contagion, and rushed into
the staggering masses, creating fresh dismay and wilder confusion.

It was a frightful scene, more terrible by far than the horrors of the
battle-field. Broken regiments, without leaders, filled the road, the
open fields, and skirted the fences, in one wild panic. Army wagons,
sutler’s teams and artillery caissons rushed together, running each
other down, and leaving the wrecks upon the road. Hacks were crushed
between heavy wagon wheels and their occupants flung to the ground.
Horses, wild with fright and maddened with wounds, galloped fiercely
through the crowd, rearing and plunging when the worn-out fugitives
attempted to seize them and save themselves from the destruction that
was threatened at every step.

Wounded men, who had found strength to stagger off the battle-field,
fell by the wayside, begging piteously to be taken up. Now and then a
kind fellow would mount a wounded soldier behind him, and give the horse
he had caught a double load; most of the poor fellows were brought
forward in this way. Sometimes a wounded man would be picked up by two
passing companions, and carried tenderly forward—for the sweet impulses
of humanity were not all lost in that wild retreat.

Then came the artillery—for much was saved—thundering through the
panic-stricken crowd, crushing everything as it went, dragged recklessly
along by horses wild as the men that urged them on. Rifles, bayonets,
pistols, blankets, haversacks and knapsacks were flung singly or in
heaps along the way. Devoured by intense thirst, black with powder,
famished and halting, these stricken men plunged into the fields,
searching for water. If a muddy pool presented itself, they staggered to
its brink with a pitiful laugh, and lying down on their faces, drank
greedily, then arose with tears in their eyes, thanking God for the
great luxury.

As they passed by the few houses on the road, women—God bless
them!—would come out, some with curt, but genuine hospitality, others
with tears streaming down their cheeks, and gave drink and food to the
wounded men as they halted by. Those who fell upon the wayside were
taken in and tended kindly till the next day. Boys came from the wells,
bearing pailsful of water, which their little sisters distributed to the
jaded men in their own tin cups.

But this panic, like all others, was of brief duration. When the
fugitives reached Centreville, they found Blenker’s brigade stretched
across the road ready to guard the retreat. Some of the fugitives
rallied and formed into line, but they had flung away their arms, and
the highway from Stone Bridge to Centreville was literally covered with
these cast-off weapons and munitions of war, hurled from the army wagons
by reckless teamsters. In places the road was blocked up by the wagons
themselves, from which the drivers had cut their teams loose and fled on
the relieved horses.

Blenker, of Miles’ division, whose duty up to this time had been one of
inaction at Centreville, now did good service at his important post.
With three regiments he kept the road, expecting every moment to be
assailed by an overpowering and victorious enemy, eager to complete his
fatal work. As the darkness increased, the peril of his position became
imminent. At eleven o’clock the attack came upon the advance company of
Colonel Stahel’s rifles, from a body of the enemy’s cavalry, which was,
however, driven back, and did not return. At this time Richardson and
Davies were both in Centreville with their brigades, which composed the
entire left wing, all well organized and under perfect command. These
troops were put under the command of Colonel Davies, who led them off
the field—Blenker’s brigade being the last to leave the town it had done
so much to protect.

The cause of this stupendous stampede no one ever has or can explain.
Cowardice it certainly was not. Those men had fought too bravely, and
suffered too patiently for that charge to be brought against them. They
were in fact victorious soldiers, for the rout of a single half hour,
disastrous as it proved, should have no power to blot out the deeds of
heroism that had marked the entire day. Was it excitement, acting on an
exhausted frame?

Let those answer who bore the flag of our Union through the long hours
of that July day, carried it under the hot sun through the fierce fight,
the dust and smoke and carnage, when the sky was one mosaic of flame,
and the earth groaned under the vibrations of artillery. They had
marched twelve miles fasting, and with but one draught of water; marched
without pause straight on to the battle field, and for nearly five hours
fought bravely as men ever fought on earth. Many who had food found no
time to eat it till the battle was at its close, but in the rash
eagerness for the field, these men, new to the necessities of war, had
flung their rations away, restive under the weight. They had started not
far from midnight, from camps in a tumult of preparation, and therefore
lacked sleep as well as food.

To all this was added THIRST—that hot, withering thirst, which burns
like lava in the throat, and drives a man mad with craving. Panting for
drink, their parched lips were blackened with gunpowder; and exhausted
nature, when she clamored for food, was answered by the bitter saltness
of cartridges ground between the soldiers’ teeth.

Think of these men, famished, sleepless, drinkless, after fighting
through the fiery noon of a hot day, suddenly overwhelmed in the midst
of a positive victory—called upon to fight another battle, while every
breath came pantingly, from thirst, and every nerve quivered with the
overtax of its natural strength. Think of them under the hoofs of the
Black Horse cavalry, and swept down by the very batteries that had been
their protection. Think of all this, and if men of military standing can
condemn them, war is a cruel master, and warriors hard critics.

It is very easy for civilians, who sit in luxurious parlors and sip cool
ices under the protection of the old flag, to sneer at this panic of
Bull Run, but many a brave man—braver than their critics, or they would
not have been in the ranks—was found even in the midst of that stampede.

What if all along the road were the marks of hurried flight—abandoned
teams, dead horses, wasted ammunition, coats, blankets? Were there not
dead and dying men there also? brave and hardy spirits, noble, generous
souls, crushed beneath the iron hoof of war—sacrificed and dying bravely
in retreat, as they had fought in the advance?

Never on this earth did the proud old American valor burn fiercer or
swell higher than on that day and field. And a reproach to the heroes
who left the impress of bravery, and gave up their lives on that red
valley, should never come from any true American heart.


                      THE BATTLE ON THE LEFT WING.

On the morning of the 21st, according to McDowell’s plan of battle, the
left wing, composed of Colonel Miles’ division, was stationed at
Centreville and at Blackburn’s Ford, the scene of Tyler’s disaster on
the 18th. Thus during the heat and struggle of that awful day the
greater portion of the left wing was six miles from the centre of
action. But notwithstanding, no better service was rendered to the
country on that day than that of this comparatively small handful of
men. The first brigade of this command, under Colonel Blenker, occupied
the heights of Centreville.

The second brigade, under Colonel Thomas A. Davies, of New York, and
Richardson’s brigade, were ordered by Colonel Miles to take position
before the batteries at Blackburn’s Ford, near the battle-ground of the
18th, to make demonstrations of attack. In pursuance of General
McDowell’s order, Colonel Davies, being ranking officer, took command of
Richardson’s brigade.

On his route from Centreville in the morning, when about half way to
Blackburn’s Ford, Colonel Davies, while conversing with the guide who
rode by him, saw a country road, apparently little used, leading through
the woods to the left. “That road,” said the guide, a fine, intelligent
fellow, “will give position farther left and nearer the enemy, for it
runs directly to Beauregard’s headquarters.”

Colonel Davies, who had graduated at West Point and served in the
Mexican war, was prompt to recognize the importance of a point which
might enable the enemy to move upon his rear. He ordered a halt, and
detailed the Thirty-first New York regiment, Colonel Pratt, and the
Thirty-second, Colonel Mathewson, with a detachment of artillery, to
guard the road at its junction, and deployed another regiment with a
section of artillery on the road, which was shaded and hedged in on both
sides by a heavy growth of timber.

This duty performed, the troops continued their march. Davies took his
position in a wheat field with what was left of his brigade, leaving
Richardson to make his own arrangements to defend the position in front
of the enemy’s batteries at Blackburn’s Ford, the battle-ground of the
18th. Richardson posted his command in this place, on the road from
Centreville heights to Blackburn’s Ford.

The wheat field which Davies occupied contained a hill which overlooked
a ravine, thickly wooded, on the opposite slope. On this hill Hunt’s
battery, commanded by Lieutenant Edwards, was placed, having been
exchanged from force of circumstances for Green’s battery, which
belonged to Davies’ command, but was now with Richardson. The battery
was supported by Davies’ own regiment, the Sixteenth New York, and the
Eighteenth, Colonel Jackson. This hill commanded a broad view of the
country on every side. The battle-ground of the right wing, six miles
off, was in full sight. Opposite his position, across the stream, was
the road which led from Bull Run to Manassas, and also to Beauregard’s
extreme right. Parallel with the river to his extreme left, it was
plainly traced, except where groves and clumps of trees concealed it.
This road, with all the high grounds sloping from Manassas, covered with
broken ridges, rich pasture lands and splendid groves, lay before the
men as they placed their battery.

On their rear the Centreville road stretched along a beautiful tract of
country, hidden by a waving sea of luxuriant foliage. Indeed all the
converging roads that threaded the vast battle-field were plainly
visible from that point.

Posted in this commanding position, Davies opened his demonstration with
two twenty-pound rifle guns from Hunt’s battery. The first shot hurled a
shell into Beauregard’s headquarters, which sent the rebels scattering
in every direction. Richardson also commenced firing across the Run,
producing the desired effect of keeping the enemy at their defences in
the neighborhood.

At ten o’clock Colonel Miles visited the command. Finding the two
regiments and artillery posted at the country road, he ordered the
regiments to move forward one-fourth of a mile, and the artillery to
join Davies’ command, leaving the road exposed. He then sent two
companies to reconnoitre the enemy’s position. They had a skirmish on
the stream, at Blackburn’s Ford, and came back with little damage.

The moment Miles rode back to Centreville, Davies ordered out his
brigade pioneer corps, all sturdy lumbermen of the North, with orders to
fell trees and block up the country road thus left exposed.

For two hours these sturdy men swung their axes among the heavy timber,
answering the distant roar of the battle-field with a wild, crashing
music, that broke with a new and more startling expression of war
through the familiar roll of cannon. With sharp, crashing groans, the
great trees were hurled to the earth, locked their splintered and broken
boughs across the road, and covered it with mangled foliage, forming a
barricade one-fourth of a mile long, impassable as a thousand cactus
hedges. The roar of cannon afar off, and the batteries belching iron
close by, failed to drown the groaning rush of these forest monarchs;
and when the near guns were silent for a little time, as often happened,
the almost human shiver of a tree, in its last poise before it rushed
downward with a wail in all its leaves and branches, conveyed an idea of
death more thrilling than any noise that battle-field had to give. At
twelve o’clock, just after the pioneers had returned to position, a body
of the enemy came down this road from Bull Run, intending to march on
Centreville and take Miles’ division in the rear. Clouds of red dust
rising from the trees betrayed them just as they had discovered the
barricade, and a storm of shell and shrapnel hastened their backward
march.

About this time the road on the other side of Bull Run was one cloud of
flying dust. It was Johnston’s forces, a close line, going up to snatch
victory from the brave army at Stone Bridge. The advance of these forces
became visible at first in tiny curls of dust rising from the woods.
Then it swelled into clouds, through which jaded horses and tired men
seemed struggling onward in a continued stream.

At this time the distant cannonading became louder and more continuous;
the far-off woods rolled up vast volumes of smoke, and where the battle
raged, a black canopy hung suspended in mid-air. How those brave men,
chained to their post by inevitable military law, panted to plunge into
that hot contest! The inaction forced upon them when a struggle of life
and death was going on in the distance, was worse than torture. They
suspected the character of those troops moving forward in the red cloud,
and followed them with eager, burning eyes. But they soon had work of
their own to do!

The firing on the right slackened between three and four o’clock,
growing fainter and fainter. About five, Colonel Davies received a line
from Richardson, saying: “_The army is in full retreat_;” but the line
was written in the haste and agitation of bad news, and was indistinct.
Davies read it: “The _enemy_ is in full retreat.” But for this
providential mistake, the battle of that day would have had a darker
record than we are making now; for the retreat, disastrous as it was,
would have been cut off, and Washington probably taken.

Believing the army victorious, these brave men bore the restraints of
their position more patiently, but still panted for a share in the work.

At this time Beauregard’s telegraph, opposite the left of Davies’
position, had been working half an hour; and from lines of dust
concentrating there and at Davies’ front, he anticipated an attack, and
made disposition accordingly.

At five o’clock, the enemy appeared on the left, as Davies formed in
line parallel to Bull Run, and about eight hundred yards distant.
Between the hill which he occupied, and the slope down which they came
from the road, was the valley or ravine, about four hundred yards from
Hunt’s battery.

They filed down the road and formed in the valley, marching four
abreast, with their guns at _right shoulder shift_, shining like a
ripple of diamonds in the sunshine, and moving forward in splendid
style.

At first Davies viewed them in silence, and standing still; but as the
column began to fill the valley, he changed front to the left, and
ordered the artillery to withhold its fire till the rear of the enemy’s
column presented itself, and directed the infantry to lie down on their
faces, and neither fire nor look up without orders. This was done that
the enemy might not learn his strength and charge on the battery.

The rear of the column at last presented itself, an officer on horseback
bringing it up. Then an order to fire was given, and Lieutenant
Benjamin, a brave young fellow from West Point, fired the first shot
from a twenty-pound rifled gun.

A cloud of dust, with a horse rearing, and its rider struggling in the
midst, was all the result that could be observed. The rear of the
enemy’s column then took the double-quick down the valley, and six
pieces of artillery opened on them. The effect was terrible; at the
distance of only four hundred yards, the enemy took the raking downward
fire in all its fury. An awful cry rang up from the valley; the men had
been swept down like wheat before a scythe, and their moans filled the
air.

This murderous fire was repeated over and over again. There was no
waiting to swab the guns, but, fast as powder and ball could be served,
the ordnance sent out its volleys. The enemy made a desperate stand, but
every shot swept down the men in masses. A vacant space appeared for a
moment, then fresh men filed in. Twice they attempted to reform and
charge the battery, but the rapidity with which the pieces were served,
and the peculiar nature of the ground, rendered every shot effective,
and they were swept back, cut down, speedily disorganized, and fled for
the woods.

During all this action, Lieutenant-Colonel Marsh, of the Sixteenth, and
Colonel Pratt, of the Thirty-first (the former since killed, and the
latter wounded before Richmond), controlled their men perfectly. Not an
infantry shot was fired during the engagement. Balls from the enemy
struck the ground in volleys before the men, filling their eyes with
dust. No man gave way; they were compelled to change position three
times during the fight. Although so many of the enemy were killed, this
spot being named, in the secession reports, as giving the heaviest
mortality of the day, only two men of Davies’ command were hurt. One man
was wounded, and Lieutenant Craig, a brave young officer from West
Point, was killed.

This brilliant engagement, so important in its results, sprang out of a
singular series of accidents: first, in the mistake made in reading
Richardson’s dispatch, and again in a failure of orders. When the main
army began its retreat past Centreville, at four o’clock, Colonel Miles
sent his aid, Captain Vincent, to order Davies and his command back to
Centreville, but Vincent, instead of coming first to Davies, stopped to
give orders to Richardson, and two regiments of Davies’ brigade,
stationed to guard his rear. After ordering Richardson back, Vincent
came over the ravine to deliver his orders to Davies, when he heard his
firing on the extreme left, went back to Centreville, to report, and
returned just as the firing ceased, to direct Colonel Davies to retire
on Centreville.

Davies, ignorant that Richardson had already fallen back, rode over to
order his retreat, but to his astonishment, almost horror, found that
the whole brigade, with two regiments of his own forces left to guard
his rear, had been gone a full hour. Thus it happened that this
important engagement had been fought and won with a single battery and
two regiments of infantry, utterly alone and unsupported on the deserted
battle-field, against a large body of men, endeavoring to sweep to the
rear and cut off the army in its retreat.

It was near six o’clock when this contest terminated—two hours after the
main army were in full retreat. If ever delay and accident were
providential on this earth, it was here; for brave as these men were, no
sane leader would have felt justified in exposing them to such peril
upon a deserted battle-field, and in the face of a whole victorious
army, after all chance of protection had been withdrawn.

When this band of victorious men reached Centreville, a stream of jaded,
wounded and heavy-hearted men were pouring through the village, while
General McDowell was making a desperate effort to collect all the troops
that still kept a show of organization, under his own command. These
troops were principally composed of the left wing, which came off the
ground in good order. McDowell, about eight o’clock, left Centreville
for Fairfax Court House. Before going Colonel Miles was relieved from
his command of the left wing, and the following order, written on the
back of a visiting card, was handed to Colonel Davies:


  Colonel Davies is consigned to the command of the left wing, as the
  troops are now formed. By command,

                                                     J. B. FRY, A. A. G.

  _July 21._


Under this running order Colonel Davies assumed command of all that was
left of the army in Centreville, and marched them in good order to
Alexandria and Washington, Blenker’s division being the last to leave
the field. This gallant officer had been among the bravest and most
resolute in protecting the retreat, and had by his firmness held the
enemy in check during the afternoon and evening.

THE BATTLE-FIELD AT NIGHT.

At night the calm air, the gently falling dew, visited that blasted
earth sweetly as they had done the night before, when the valley was
fresh with verdure and beautiful with thrifty crops. But the scene it
presented was O, how different! In mercy the deep shadows cast by the
woods concealed its worst features, and the smoke had risen so densely
between earth and sky that the moon looked down upon it mournfully,
through a veil. The battle-field was still, save when the solemn shiver
of the leaves came like a painful and mighty sigh, or the troubled waves
of the Run continued it in hoarser murmurs. If human moans broke the
stillness, they were lost on that vast field, and only heard by the
pitying angels.

But solitary lights wandered over the field, like stars dropped by a
merciful heaven to light the departing souls through the valley and
shadow of death. They were indeed heavenly rays, for all that is divine
in human mercy sent them forth. Kind men, and more than one heroic woman
carried them from point to point over that dreary battle-field,
searching among the dead for those who, breathing yet, might suffer for
water or Christian comfort.

There was a house on the hill-top where Griffin’s battery had stood, and
where the Connecticut troops had planted the stars and stripes in their
last desperate charge. Through all the fight, a helpless and frightened
family had found precarious shelter in their own dwelling. The household
was composed of a son, a daughter, and the mother, a gentle Christian
woman, who had been confined to her bed for years. There was no hopes of
flight for her, poor soul, and neither son nor daughter would abandon
her when the storm of battle was at their threshold. Hoping to find a
place of safety, the devoted children carried her to a neighboring
ravine, sheltering her with their own persons.

But this spot became at last more dangerous than the house. So the
harassed children took their parent back to her home, and placing her in
bed again, stood to screen her from the bullets that broke like hail
through the walls and windows. While her house was riddled with cannon
balls and musket shot, and the missiles of death plunged through her
chamber and into her bed, three bullets pierced her frail person. Still
she outlived the battle tempest that raged around her, a tempest that
she had not even dreamed of approaching her dwelling when that fatal day
dawned upon it. When the night came on she died peacefully, and the
troubled moon looked down on a mournful scene here also. Within the
riddled walls and under the torn roof, this gentle woman lay, in a
quieter sleep than she had known for many a long night, and by her bed
knelt the bereaved children who had dared so much, weeping that a life
so peaceful should have met that violent ending. Painful as this was,
there lay many poor soldiers on the field that hour, whose children
would never have the privilege of weeping over them.

In an orchard of young trees, just forming their fruit, lay many a
prostrate Southron, sent to his long account; for the enemy had suffered
terribly there. The northern verge of the field was blackened by a fine
grove in which a Georgia regiment had fought, and under its black
shadows the dead lay thick and numerous. Here Lamar had fallen, and many
a brave Northman slept side by side with the foe he had sent into
eternity but a moment in advance of himself. The fatal hill, scorched
and blackened in every tree and blade of grass, was strewn with the dead
of both sections, among them some of the bravest leaders that the enemy
boasted.

There have been rumors of great cruelty on the battle-field after the
fight was over—of men prowling like fiends among the dead, and murdering
the wounded; but these things should be thrice proven before we believe
them of American citizens. Rumor is always triple-tongued, and human
nature does not become demoniac in a single hour. One thing is certain,
many an act of merciful kindness was performed that night, which an
honest pen should prefer to record. Certain it is that Southern soldiers
in many instances shared their water—the most precious thing they
had—with the wounded Union men. A soldier passing over the field found
two wounded combatants lying together—one was a New Yorker, the other a
Georgian. The poor wounded fellow from New York cried out piteously for
water, and the Georgian, gathering up his strength, called out: “For
God’s sake give him drink; for I called on a New York man for water when
his column was in retreat, and he ran to the trench at the risk of his
life and brought it to me!”

One brave young enemy lost his life after passing through all the perils
of the battle, in attempting to procure drink for his wounded foes.

If there were individual instances of cruelty on either side, and this
is possible—let us remember that there was kindness too; and when the
day shall come—God grant it may be quickly—when we are one people again,
let the cruelty be forgiven and the kindness only remembered.

And now our record of the battle of Bull Run is at an end. It was
valiantly contended on both sides, and won only from superior numbers
and reinforcements of fresh troops, poured upon the exhausted soldiery
of the Union. To gain this contest the South sent her best and very
bravest generals. Her forces were led by Beauregard and Johnston, both
experienced officers. They were also cheered by the near presence of
Jefferson Davis, who came upon the field when the victory was assured,
amid the shouts of a soldiery, the more enthusiastic because they had
just been rescued from almost certain defeat. They had the choice of
position and had fortified it with wonderful skill; a thorough knowledge
of the country, and troops unwearied by long marches—indeed, the
advantages were altogether on their side. The North, never dreaming that
an open rebellion would break out, was utterly dependant on
undisciplined troops; while the South, having premeditated resistance to
the Government, had been drilling men for months, if not years. There
was no one point except in the actual bravery of their leaders and
soldiers in which the enemy was not superior to the Union forces. In
personal valor the Southerners themselves have never claimed to surpass
that exhibited in this battle by their foes.

The smallest estimate of the forces actually engaged on the Southern
side is eighteen thousand—while the Union forces which crossed Bull Run
did not at any time count more than thirteen thousand. One brigade of
McDowell’s eighteen thousand was not in the action, except in a vain
effort to check the retreat. This brigade, of General Tyler’s division,
was stationed at Stone Bridge, and never advanced upon the actual
battle-field. The attack repulsed by Davies on the left wing, at
Blackburn’s Ford, took place nearly two hours after the army was in
retreat.

In the loss of officers, the enemy was even more unfortunate than the
Union army. The fall of General Bee, one of the bravest of their
leaders, Bartow, Colonel Thomas, Colonel Hampton, Colonel Johnson,
Lamar, and others, shed a gloom upon their victory, and greatly weakened
their cause in the future. The Union loss was heavy, for the men who
fell or were taken prisoners were among the bravest that marched with
the army, but the loss of officers by death was inferior to that of the
enemy, and though Corcoran and Wilcox were wounded and taken prisoners,
they were not lost to their country. In ordnance and munitions of war
the conquest was less important than might have been supposed. Many of
the Union guns were rescued from the field during the next day. Of the
fine horses attached to the ordnance a large proportion were killed, and
others were saved by their drivers, who cut the traces, and rode them
from the scene of battle. The loss in killed and wounded on the Union
side, was 481 killed, 1,011 wounded, and 1,216 missing: total, 2,708.
That of the enemy numbered, by Beauregard’s report, 393 killed, 1,200
wounded.

The victory was a very important one to the South, as it gave prestige
and force to a rebellion which, had the position of things been
reversed, would, it is probable, have expired before the year went out.
But in the North it only served to arouse the people to a pitch of
excitement hitherto unparalleled; if troops had been sent forth in
regiments before, they came in brigades after that defeat.

[Illustration: Winfield Scott, Lieut. Genl.]




                           WESTERN VIRGINIA.


Virginia has three grand divisions, viz.: the Eastern Section, extending
from tide-water up to the Blue Ridge Mountains; the Great Valley between
the Blue Ridge and the Alleghanies; Western Virginia, stretching from
the Great Valley to the Ohio river.

The contest between the people of the eastern and western portions of
the State for supremacy had been one of long duration, dating back for
many years. Internal improvements appear to have been the cause of this
dissension—Western Virginia claiming that the East had enjoyed and been
benefitted by them hitherto exclusively. In this jealousy the
inhabitants of the Valley sympathized, and the completion of the James
River and Kanawha Canal to the Ohio aroused a feeling of such bitter
rivalry, that even the Governor favored the project of a division of the
State. Added to this was the complaint of unequal taxation. The eastern
portion being the large slaveholding district, paid _per capita_,
without regard to value, while the wealth of the western, consisting of
land and stock, was taxed _ad valorem_. This strife, of necessity, was
carried from the people into the Legislature, and stormy debates
followed. The feeling of the West on the slavery question, also, added
fuel to the flame, and the loyalty of that section was attacked.

In the State Convention which passed the ordinance of secession, the
western delegates took a firm and bold stand against it. When the Act
was about to be consummated, great excitement prevailed in regard to the
action of the western members, both inside and out of the Convention,
and some of them were obliged to leave Richmond. In May, when the
ordinance was submitted to the people, the north-western counties voted
largely against it.

A Convention assembled at Wheeling, and a committee was appointed, which
called a General Convention to convene at the same place on the 11th of
June. Forty counties were represented there, and an ordinance was passed
for the reorganization of the State Government, every officer to be
obliged to swear allegiance anew to the United States, and to repudiate
the Richmond Convention. A Governor, Lieutenant-Governor, and other
State officers were elected, and the Legislature was summoned “to
assemble at the United States District Courtroom in the city of
Wheeling, at noon, on the first day of July, 1861.” Both houses met and
organized. The Governor’s Message was sent intogether with a document
from Washington, officially recognizing the new Government. The message
recommended an energetic co-operation with the Federal Government.
United States Senators were then elected.

On the 20th of August, the Convention passed an ordinance creating a new
State, to be called “Kanawha.” It included thirty-nine counties, and
provision was made for the admission of other adjoining counties, if a
majority of the people of each desired it. The question of forming a
separate State was submitted to the popular vote on the 24th of October,
and resulted in favor of the proposition by a large majority. Since that
time other counties have signified a desire to be admitted.

Western Virginia became the scene of military operations directly after
the war broke out, following in close order upon the occupation of
Alexandria. On the 30th of May Colonel Kelly took possession of Grafton,
and the occupation of Phillipi followed but a few days subsequently.
Federal troops also crossed the Ohio and entered Parkersburgh. General
McClellan had command of this portion of the State, it being included in
the Ohio district, and issued his proclamation to the Union men of
Virginia.

A series of offensive and defensive events now followed each other in
rapid succession, exhibiting bravery and determination unparalleled in
history—individual heroism and uncomplaining endurance of
suffering—rapid marches and brilliant charges, that shine in letters of
fire upon the pages of our war history, and threw the prestige of early
victory about the northern arms. It was here that McClellan won his
first laurels—here that chivalric Lander met a soldier’s death—here that
Kelly was wounded, till for weeks and weeks his life was despaired of.
In fact, Western Virginia is covered with victorious Union
battle-fields. She has indeed given their greenest laurels to many of
our generals.

The military department of Ohio, in which Western Virginia was included,
was organized on the tenth of May, and Major-General George B. McClellan
appointed to the command. His headquarters were at Cincinnati. On the
26th of the same month he issued his first proclamation, declaring that
his mission was one of fraternity, union, and protection, and called
upon all patriotic men to aid him in his endeavors to accomplish this
holy purpose. The proclamation produced a marked effect. Colonel Kelly,
of Wheeling, Virginia, had prior to that date organized a regiment for
the defence of the Union, known as the “First Virginia Volunteers.”

On Friday, the 24th of May, about twelve hundred rebels had assembled
and marched from Harper’s Ferry to Grafton, a town on the Baltimore and
Ohio railroad, and forced many citizens to abandon their homes and fly
for safety, leaving their property to be pillaged by the enemy. About
one hundred of the fugitives reached Morgantown. The inhabitants of that
place, warned of their danger, immediately flew to arms and prepared for
a vigorous defence. Finding that they were not to be molested, and
burning for revenge, they marched, 1000 strong—their ranks having been
swelled by friends from Pennsylvania—towards Grafton.

The rebels became alarmed and fled to Philippi, in Bourbon county, about
17 miles southward. On Monday, the 27th, detachments of Ohio and Indiana
troops crossed the Ohio river at Wheeling and at Marietta, on their way,
also, to Grafton. Simultaneously, Colonel Kelly’s regiment of Virginians
moved forward in the same direction, but the bridges having been
destroyed, their march was delayed. At every point, and especially at
Mannington and Fairmount, they were received with great enthusiasm and
hailed as deliverers.




                          BATTLE OF PHILLIPI.


Brigadier-General Thomas A. Morris arrived at Grafton on the evening of
June 1st, and took command of the Union forces. An expedition was
immediately organized to surprise and attack the rebels at Philippi,
under the command of Colonel Porterfield. The troops left in two
divisions. The First Virginia regiment, part of the Ohio Sixteenth, and
the Seventh Indiana, under Colonel Kelly, moved eastward, by rail to
Thornton, a distance of five miles, and from there marched on twenty-two
miles, to Phillipi, reaching the town on the lower side. The second
division, consisting of the Sixth and Seventh Indiana, the Fourteenth
Ohio, and a section of artillery under Lieutenant-Colonel Sturgis, met
by detachments at Webster, on the North-western Virginia railroad, and
marched twelve miles to Phillipi. The combined forces were commanded by
Colonels Dumont and Lander, and at eight o’clock on the night of the 2d
of June marched forward through one of the most overwhelming storms
known to our country that year. Lander had been detailed to a special
command by General Morris, and in the terrible march that followed,
through darkness, mud and rain he led the way, sometimes exploring the
route three miles ahead of his forces, in the midst of profound
darkness, and through mud so deep and tenacious that every forward step
was a struggle. The men followed, bravely toiling through the miry soil,
staggering forward in thick darkness, and pelted by the rain so
violently that they could not have seen the road had it been daylight.
Still, not a murmur was heard. Against the whole force of the elements
the brave fellows struggled on, eager for the storm of fire which was
soon to follow the deluge that poured upon them. Now and then Lander’s
majestic form, seated upon his charger, would loom upon them through the
darkness, returning from his scouting duty to cheer them with his deep,
sympathetic voice, which aroused them like a trumpet. Thus they moved
on, supported by one stern purpose, through woods, across valleys, and
over hills, the storm drowning their approach till they drew up on the
edge of the town overlooking the enemy. But it was not altogether a
surprise. Just before they reached the town the troops had passed a
farm-house. A woman within that house sprang from her bed as she saw the
lines of troops filing slowly by in the misty gray of the dawn, and
guessed their object. She instantly aroused her little son and sent him
by a short cross-road to give the alarm. The boy was quick of foot, but
the hopes of conflict had so aroused the energies of these jaded men
that he was but a few minutes in advance of them.

Lander’s troops took position on a hill across the river and below the
town, commanding it and the encampments around. He at once planted two
pieces of artillery, and prepared to open fire at exactly four o’clock,
the hour agreed upon for the attack, which was to be made at once by
both divisions. Lander was to assault them in front, while Kelly was to
attack the rear and cut off all retreat. But Lander found his division
alone before the enemy. The terrible night, the almost impassable roads,
and a march of twenty-two miles had delayed Kelly’s forces, and when he
did arrive it was to come in by mistake below the town.

The presence of Lander’s troops aroused the town and threw it into
terrible commotion. In vain Lander searched the distant hills, impatient
for Kelly’s appearance. The hour of attack had arrived and passed. The
men became impatient as their leader, who, in his indomitable courage
commenced the battle with a portion of his forces.

When Lander gave the order his eager men sprang to their posts, and the
artillery opened fire. As the first gun awoke its thunder on the
encampments, Kelly advanced, but in the wrong direction. He instantly
comprehended Lander’s action, and with prompt courage charged upon the
encampments. The batteries had by this time obtained the range, and were
pouring in their messengers of terror and death, tearing through tents
and cabins, and scattering the rebels like chaff in every direction.
After firing a volley of musketry, Lander advanced.

Colonel Kelly’s command was close upon the enemy, the Virginia troops in
advance, the Henry Clay Guards in front, and Colonel Kelly and Captain
Fordyce leading, while Colonel Lander’s force came rushing down the hill
to the bridge and joined in an impetuous pursuit of the fugitives.
Colonel Kelly, who, with a bravery amounting almost to rashness, had
been foremost from the very first, was shot by a concealed foe, the ball
entering the left breast and lodging beneath the shoulder blade. As his
men conveyed him to a place of safety, this brave man, while in the
agony of his pain, exclaimed, “I expect I shall have to die. I would be
glad to live, if it might be, that I might do something for my country,
but if it cannot be, I shall have at least the consolation of knowing
that I fell in a just cause.” But he was not destined to be cut off in
the zenith of his fame and usefulness. After a few weeks of danger and
anguish he was again performing noble duty for the country he loved so
well.

In this dashing victory fifteen of the rebels were killed, a large
number wounded, and ten taken prisoners, together with a quantity of
camp equipage, arms, &c. The organization of the rebels at that point
was completely broken up, and the men driven to the mountains.




                GREAT DESTRUCTION OF RAILROAD PROPERTY.


The bitter animosity of the rebel army was strikingly illustrated on the
23d July, by the destruction of a large number of locomotives and cars
of the Baltimore and Ohio railroad by secession troops under the command
of Colonel Thomas J. Jackson. Forty-eight locomotives and three hundred
cars were blown up or burned, one of the engines having been previously
wrapped in our national ensign. The road had been rendered impassable by
the destruction of bridges, and, therefore, the rolling stock could not
have been rendered available. The estimated loss was about
three-quarters of a million of dollars.




                 GENERAL McCLELLAN IN WESTERN VIRGINIA.


General McClellan, during the time that elapsed since his appointment,
had been actively engaged in organizing his forces and getting them
ready for efficient service. Scouting parties—an important feature of
his department—were detailed for service, and raw troops replaced by
experienced men. Colonel Kelly, who was now recovering from the wounds
received at Phillipi, had been appointed by Governor Pierpont to the
command of the Virginia brigade of volunteers. Gens. Morris, Hill,
Schenck and Schleich were assigned their respective positions—the
telegraph lines were put in order, and new ones for military purposes
were constructed where necessary. The arrival of fresh regiments, among
which Colonel Rosecranz made his appearance, added great activity to the
department. On the side of the enemy were Generals Robert S. Garnett,
Henry A. Wise, Ex-Governor, John B. Floyd, Ex-Secretary of War, and
Colonel Pegram.

Columns of Federal troops were dispatched to attack the enemy,
simultaneously, at three different points, and the first collision
between them occurred on the 10th of July.




                         BATTLE OF SCAREYTOWN.


A brigade of rebels under Governor Wise, crossed the Alleghanies to the
head-waters of the Kanawha, with the intention of attacking the rear of
McClellan’s forces, while General Garnett was prepared to meet him in
front. General Cox had been dispatched to this section with a
considerable force of Ohio, Indiana and Kentucky troops, and was
encamped on the Kanawha about ten miles below its junction with Scarey
Creek. Hearing that a portion of the rebel force had taken position at
Scareytown, but four miles above his camp, on the other side of the
river, and were entrenching themselves there, General Cox dispatched a
force of about 1,000 men, consisting of the Twelfth Ohio, a portion of
the Twenty-first Ohio, the Cleveland Artillery, and a detachment of
cavalry, all under the command of Colonel Lowe, to dislodge the rebels
if practicable. The column was ferried across the stream, and moved
cautiously onward, the scouts scouring the country as they advanced. The
enemy was found to be entrenched on the opposite side of Pocatallico
Creek, here intersecting the Kanawha, protected by breastworks, and also
sheltered by woods, about half way up a slope of high hills, having two
pieces of artillery in position, while a portion of their infantry had
possessed themselves of ten or twelve log huts, constituting the village
of Scareytown, in which they had improvised loop-holes. The Federal
troops were met by a discharge from the rebel battery as soon as they
made their appearance; but the artillery of Captain Cotton soon got in
position, and returned the fire of the enemy with good effect. The
infantry were now ordered to advance, and rushed fearlessly across the
stream, which was fordable, in the face of a heavy fire. The left wing,
composed of portions of the Twelfth and Twenty-first Ohio, had reached
the enemy’s entrenchments, but being unsupported by the right, and a
fresh regiment of the rebels appearing on the ground, they were
compelled to retreat, leaving many of their dead and wounded on the
field.

The loss of the Federal forces by this engagement was nine killed,
thirty-eight wounded, and three missing. Of the rebel loss we have no
record.

A great misfortune of the day, however, was the capture of five of the
principal officers of General Cox’s command, who were not attached to
the expedition.

Colonels Woodruff and De Villers, Lieutenant-Colonel Neff, and Captains
Austin and Hurd, prompted by an eager desire to witness the engagement
in which they were not assigned a part, rode up the banks of the river
to its junction with the creek, and hearing a loud shout, were led to
believe that the Federal forces were victorious. They procured a skiff,
crossed the creek, and inadvertently strayed within the enemy’s lines,
where they were all made prisoners.


                   HOW THE ENEMY WAS TO BE ATTACKED.

General Garnett had at this time nearly 10,000 men under his command,
and occupied a position at Beverly, on Tygart’s Valley river, Randolph
Co., in a valley of the Alleghany Mountains. Two good roads unite at an
acute angle at this place, one leading westwardly to Buckhannon, and the
other north-west to Phillipi. A mountainous ridge crosses both these
roads in front of Beverly, and at each point of intersection General
Garnett had an intrenched camp. The first was on the road to Buckhannon,
called the Rich Mountain Camp, under command of Colonel Pegram; and the
second, on the road to Phillipi, called Laurel Hill Camp, under General
Garnett’s personal command.

Early on the morning of the 11th of July, General Rosecrans was
dispatched to attack Colonel Pegram, and dislodge him from his position.
General Morris was to make a simultaneous movement on the position held
by General Garnett.




                        BATTLE AT RICH MOUNTAIN.

                             JULY 12, 1862.


The rebel entrenchments at Rich Mountain were very strong in their
position, and were evidently to be taken only by a great sacrifice of
life. They had rolled great trees down the steep sides of the mountain,
and banding their branches into a general entanglement, filled the open
spaces with earth and stones. The dense forest on all sides made the
approach almost impassable. General Rosecranz was accordingly directed
to attack them in their rear. For this purpose he took with him the
Eighth and Tenth Indiana, and the Nineteenth Ohio, and under the
leadership of an experienced guide, started about daylight to ascend the
mountain. The path was exceedingly difficult and tedious, most of the
distance being through thick laurel underbrush, almost impenetrable
woods, and a broken, rocky region, which gave them a toilsome march of
nearly nine miles. Meantime a courier from General McClellan with
dispatches for General Rosecrans, had been captured by the rebels, who
instantly took the alarm, and a body of 2,500 men were sent to the top
of the mountain by a short route which they commanded, and on the
arrival of the Union forces they stood ready for defence. The rebels had
three cannon in place, and awaited the troops, facing that part of the
road where they would emerge from the timber. For some time there was
skirmishing, the rebels firing their cannon into the woods at random.
The Union troops had no cannon, and left the sheltering trees only long
enough to deliver a volley at any one time, and then retired back to the
bushes. They thus succeeded in drawing the enemy from his earthworks,
and leading him into the open fields, where the encounter took place.

[Illustration:

  BATTLE OF RICH MOUNTAIN.
]

Colonel Lander called for twenty sharpshooters, who speedily left the
cannon without men to work them. Their places were filled by others,
when the Nineteenth Ohio, which had gained a position on high ground in
the rear, poured in a tremendous volley, and giving loud cheers, rushed
forward for a closer struggle. The Eighth and Tenth immediately charged
upon the guns and carried them, and then the entire entrenchment. The
enemy found it impossible to resist the impetuous and daring onset, and
broke up instantly in a total rout. The action was short, but fiercely
contested. One hundred and forty rebels were found killed, while the
Federal loss was only twenty-five or thirty.

The victors attempted to follow the flying enemy, but after proceeding a
short distance were recalled, and formed in line, in anticipation of an
attack from the fort, at the foot of the mountain. It appeared, however,
that when their cannon ceased firing they gave up all as lost, and
deserted their works. General Rosecranz remained on the field burying
the dead, and taking care of the wounded, till next morning, when he
marched down to the fort with his forces, and took possession. Several
hundred prisoners were taken on the field, and Colonel Pegram, after
wandering about nearly two days without finding a chance to escape,
surrendered unconditionally to General McClellan, with the remnant of
his command, numbering six hundred men.




                       BATTLE OF CARRICK’S FORD.

                             JULY 13, 1861.


While these stirring events were transpiring, General Garnett, hearing
of the combined movements, and conscious that he would be unable to
maintain his position, or make a successful retreat if defeated,
withdrew his forces from the Laurel Hill camp, and was proceeding
towards Beverly, when he received intelligence of the surrender of
Colonel Pegram and the rapid advance of General Rosecranz, accompanied
by the intrepid Colonel Lander, towards the spot he was himself
approaching. He then struck off on the Leading Creek Pike, half a mile
from Leadsville, and commenced a rapid retreat towards St. George, in
Tucker county.

General Morris’s brigade entered the rebel camp at Beverly at 10 A. M.
of Friday, the 12th of July. At 11 o’clock the Federal troops detailed
to follow General Garnett started in pursuit, under Captain Benham. The
advance comprised Colonel Steedman’s Ohio Fourteenth, Colonel Milroy’s
Ninth and Colonel Dumont’s Seventh Indiana, and two pieces of artillery,
with forty men—total about eighteen hundred and fifty. At two o’clock on
the morning of the 13th they set out in a pitiless storm, guided by the
baggage, tents, trunks, blankets, knapsacks, and clothing thrown away by
the enemy. The roads had been obstructed by the retreating foe. A guide,
however, led them by a cross-road, which enabled them to gain rapidly on
the enemy. On reaching the track again, it was found necessary to keep
an advance of axemen to clear the obstructions. This was performed with
the greatest zeal and alacrity, while the storm raged furiously around
them.

About noon General Garnett had reached and passed Kahler’s Ford, twelve
miles from St. George. When the advance of the Federal troops emerged
from the ford they caught sight of the rear of the enemy, and they were
instantly nerved with new life. The retreating Southerners were also
excited, and redoubled their speed, if possible, throwing away
everything that encumbered their progress. General Garnett had become
thoroughly convinced that there was no alternative but to make a stand,
and thus test the question of superiority without delay. He continued
his course, however, until he came to the fourth ford on the river,
known as Carrick’s Ford, and prepared to receive his pursuers. On the
left bank of the river were level bottom lands, cornfields, and meadows.
On the right high bluffs commanded the fields below, and its bank was
thickly hedged in with impenetrable thickets of laurel. Fording the
river, and placing his men on the high bluff on the right, they were
completely concealed, while the situation gave his artillery every
advantage. The wagon train was left standing in the river, evidently to
mislead his pursuers with the idea that they were unable to cross the
rocky bed of the stream. The Federal troops advanced to seize the train,
and were consequently within range of his artillery on the bluff.

The Federal columns pushed rapidly forward, Colonel Steedman’s
Fourteenth Ohio in front, and as they approached the teams their drivers
called out that they would surrender. The position, and the conduct of
the teamsters, however, excited the suspicions of the regiment, and the
men were disposed in order, with skirmishers thrown out towards the
ford, the line moving down after them in the finest order. Just as the
advance were approaching the stream, and only about two hundred yards
from the steep bluff on the other side, an officer rose from the bushes
and gave the order to fire. Immediately a volley of musketry was
followed by a discharge of artillery. The Fourteenth Ohio and Seventh
Indiana were directly under the fire, and returned it, doing good
execution, while that of the enemy flew harmlessly over their heads. The
Fourteenth Ohio, being nearest the ford, were almost exclusively aimed
at, and for a time the storm of war was frightful. The roar of cannon,
the crashing of trees, the bursting of the shells, and quick volleys of
musketry made the wild scene of terrible and appalling havoc. Amid it
all our men stood undaunted, and returned the fire with great rapidity,
and in superior order. Burnett’s artillery then came up, and opened, and
under cover of their fire the Seventh Indiana was directed to cross the
river and climb the bluff on the enemy’s left. They made the attempt,
and two companies had already reached the top, when they were directed
to descend and make the ascent so as to turn the enemy’s right. Colonel
Dumont led his men down the stream with such dispatch, that the enemy
could not turn his pieces upon them until they were concealed from view
by the smoke, and beyond the guns on the bluff. During this movement the
Fourteenth Ohio, and Colonel Milroy’s Ninth Indiana, with our artillery,
kept up a brisk fire in front, until suddenly Colonel Dumont’s men,
having scaled the bluff, appeared on the right, and poured in a volley.
The appearance of our troops there was the signal for a retreat, and the
enemy instantly broke up in rout and disorder, precipitately flying from
the field.

Our regiments and artillery then crossed the river in hot pursuit. At a
distance of a quarter of a mile the road again crosses the stream, and
General Garnett sought in vain to rally his troops at this point. Major
Gordon of the Seventh Indiana led the advance, and soon reached the spot
where General Garnett, on the opposite side of the river, was
endeavoring to rally his forces around him. Gordon called upon Captain
Ferry’s company, and ordered them to fire. The rebels greeted Major
Gordon with one volley and fled. General Garnett turned to call his men,
and motioned them back, but all in vain. At this moment, Sergeant
Burlingame, of Captain Ferry’s company, raised his piece, took aim, and
fired. General Garnett fell backward, his head lying towards our forces,
and with open mouth, as though gasping for breath. He uttered not a
groan, and when Major Gordon reached him, a few moments afterwards, he
was just expiring. The Major stooped down, tenderly closed his eyes,
disposed his limbs, and left a guard of loyal soldiers around him to
protect all that remained of the chivalrous and honored, but mistaken
leader of Western Virginia.

Every Virginian among the followers of this gallant man fled, and left
him to fall and expire alone. But a young soldier wearing the Georgia
uniform and button, sprang to his side, only to share his fate, for a
musket shot answered this devotion with death, and he fell side by side
with his commander. The Federal troops, even in the glow of victory,
stopped to pay a tribute of respect to this generous youth. They placed
a board at his grave and cut rudely upon it, “A brave fellow, who shared
his General’s fate and fell fighting by his side. Name unknown.”

The loss of our troops was killed, two; wounded, twelve. The enemy lost
eight on the field, three died in hospital, and ten others were wounded.
A large number of prisoners were taken, including six Georgia captains
and lieutenants, a surgeon, and a number of non-commissioned officers.
Beside prisoners, there were also captured two stands of colors, one
rifled cannon, forty loaded wagons, hundreds of muskets and side arms,
with other effects of various kinds.

This action is honorable in the highest degree to all engaged in it.
They had pursued and overtaken an enemy who had twelve hours advance;
they had made a forced march of nearly thirty miles in less than
twenty-four hours, over the worst of roads, and with scarcely any food,
some of the men having been without nourishment for thirty-six hours.
They then fought a battle, cut off the enemy’s baggage train, captured
their cannon, routed their army, and found themselves in full possession
of the field. The day and the event will ever be memorable, and Ohio and
Indiana may well be proud of their sons.

The remainder of General Garnett’s army effected their escape through
the Cheat Mountain Gap, which was seized and fortified by General
McClellan. In these two engagements 150 of the enemy were killed, 300
wounded, upwards of 1000 prisoners were taken, and nearly all their war
material fell into the hands of the victors.

The loyal troops were too much exhausted by the incessant labors and
privations of their three days’ struggle to pursue the scattered and
dispirited enemy any further through the mountains, and went into camp
at Huttonville and Laurel Hill, to await the next call to duty. General
McClellan closed his dispatch of July 14th, with the words, “I firmly
believe that secession is killed in this section of the country.”

During the battle an incident illustrating the coolness, bravery and
generosity of Colonel Lander towards a brave foeman occurred, that
deserves honorable mention. The horse of the Colonel had been shot from
under him, and he, dismounted, had taken his stand upon a rock directly
in front of a rebel gun. Discharging musket after musket, as fast as
they could be loaded for him, he remained a noted mark for the enemy to
shoot at. At a short distance, all the men belonging to a cannon of the
Confederates had been shot down or fled, and their Lieutenant was
undauntedly serving and firing it, single-handed. Three times had it
belched forth flame and ball, when Colonel Lander, noticing the bravery
of the man, called out to him—

“If you fire that gun again you are a dead man!”

“Sir, I shall fire it as long as I have life in my body!” was the cool,
fearless and curt reply.

This was an instance of noble courage well calculated to be appreciated
by a true soldier, and the Union Colonel, leaping from the rock, shouted
to his men—

“Boys, that is too brave a man for me to kill.”

                  *       *       *       *       *

On the 21st of July the Federal army under General McDowell, having
suffered severely, and retreated from Manassas, General McClellan, who
by his achievements had earned a brilliant prestige, was ordered, on the
22d, to Washington, to take command of the Department of the Potomac,
and General Rosecranz was appointed to succeed him in the Department of
the Ohio.




                               THE WEST.


Comprehended within the boundaries of that noble portion of our country
called “The West,” is a people who can justly claim to be not only of
the best muscle and nerve of the land, but second to none in
intellectual vigor and sterling integrity of character. A single thought
tells us how just this claim is. The West was settled by the picked men
and women of the old States. When the sloping-roofed farmhouses of New
England became too circumscribed for the sons and daughters that filled
them, the most enterprising members of a household left the rest to till
the homestead acres while they went forth into the wilderness to cut the
forest trees away, and let sunshine into the shadowy bosom of the woods,
to build their log cabins in the first clearing, and so work out a sure
independence for themselves, as they became benefactors to the world.

In the end both position and wealth followed these daring pioneers. As
the roving Indian slowly retreated from the frontier which was
stretching westward every hour, sweeping the wilderness away with it, he
found the rich earth lavish of her returns for his self-sacrifice and
his labor. He drank in enlargement of thought and purpose from amid the
luxuriant prairies and vast wilderness which spread its untrodden bosom
between his home and the Rocky Mountains. He watched the Father of
Rivers cleaving the best portions of a continent with his broad waters,
and drank in lessons of true freedom which will never lose their value
to his descendants. With a rifle for his companion and an axe for his
best friend, the backwoodsman of America learned the art of border
warfare, and trained himself in a school of hardship that made his
sinews firm as iron and capable of resisting any fatigue.

With hearts and minds expanding with the boundless scenes around them,
these adventurous men grew so careless of danger that the word fear was
blotted from their lexicon long before the present generation came into
existence.

Is it strange that the descendants of such men should be open-handed,
grand-hearted and brave, as we have found them in this war for our
common Union? The enthusiasm of the old men who have dropped quietly
away into their western graves, has broken forth anew in this younger
generation. Like a spark of fire dropped upon a prairie in the autumn,
their enthusiasm is easily enkindled. A single word against the old
flag, one sacrilegious touch upon its flagstaff, was enough to rouse
them into action. Nowhere on earth is the stars and stripes held more
sacred than in the West. The first ball that cut through the flag at
Fort Sumter aroused the old pioneer blood into determined and terrible
resistance.

The history of the Mexican war is a record of what western men can do on
the battle-field—charges at which even their countrymen who knew them
wondered—sufferings patiently endured, marches that taxed the
strongest—all these things have proved of what true metal the West is
made. With war-wreaths dyed in blood at Cerro Gordo, baptized in fire at
Chapultepec, and rendered immortal at Buena Vista, these men were not
likely to see their own Government turned upon without rising as one man
to defend it.

Through the golden grain and the rustling cornfields of the West, the
news of the bombardment of Sumter, the attack at Baltimore, and the call
of the President, rushed like one of its own tornadoes from city to
village, from farm-house to cabin. The news ran and the answer came
thunder-toned. The old man took down his rifle from the antler bracket
on the cabin wall. His son left the plow in its furrow, and all classes
and conditions of men came forward with brave hearts and ready hands,
and laid them on the altar of their country.

The watchfires of freedom were kindled, and on every hill and through
the valleys poured a tide of armed men, unconquerable and resistless.
These western men took the field, ready at once for the deadly strife.
Their entire lives had been one incessant training for the hardships and
dangers of war. They had but one regret—that their march was against
brothers armed against the nation—all else was merged in the glorious
thought that they, the very children of liberty, had the power to yield
up everything, even life, and home, that a great country should be
maintained in every inch of its soil and every right of its people.

Long had the great West toiled to feed the starving nations of the
earth. Long had she poured from her overflowing storehouses countless
millions of food into the waiting lap of the needy manufacturing
countries. From her great wealth of food she had always been ready to
feed the world. When the war-cry aroused her, she was just as strong and
just as prompt to fight the world. The national honor was hers to
reverence and avenge. The old flag—its emblem and its glory—who should
spring to its rescue if not the West? Did not a chain of crystal lakes
crown her at the north, clasped together by the eternal emeralds of
Niagara? Was not the Mississippi, her great highway to the gulf, a
mighty thoroughfare, which no force should wrest from her while she had
power to hold its banks with serried walls of steel? Was this river, the
pathway of her greatness, one source of her renown, to be blocked up
while she could cleave her own mountains asunder, and force them to give
forth iron for gunboats, or gather lead from her bosom to mould into
bullets? Not while these people could turn their workshops into
manufactories of war-missiles, and their prairie steeds into chargers,
should an enemy—brother or stranger—take one right from the West by
force. This was the stern resolve of our pioneer men when the
war-trumpet rang over the prairies of the West, and quick to act as
prompt to resolve, her people arose as one man. There was no cavil about
trifles then. Her fertile fields were stripped of their wealth, and her
prairies of their cattle to furnish food—not alone to furnish food for
themselves, but for the armies of the East. Soon her rivers swarmed with
iron-clad gunboats, and her railways became military roads—her cities
tented fields, her palaces recruiting offices, her cabins free homes for
soldiers when their faces turned toward the war.

The West was impatient of nothing but delay—but she chafed wildly at any
obstacle that impeded the progress of her armies.

How well these men have fought, and with what heroism they have
suffered, let the record we are about to make of Henry, Donelson,
Pittsburgh Landing, and many another bravely contested point, answer.
Let the noble hearts stilled in death, and countless graves upon which
the tender grass is now springing, answer.

With battle songs on their lips they marched away from their homes, with
battle cries upon their lips many of them fell gloriously, never to see
those homes again. If the West has been brave in war, so will she prove
generous when Peace shall come. The nation they have helped to save, and
those in revolt, when true brotherhood comes back, will yet give the
West a monument worthy of its fame.




                               MISSOURI.


The geographical position of Missouri is such, that if thrown into the
scale, she would weigh heavily either for or against the Union. When the
war broke out her people were divided, though the majority were believed
to be loyal to the Constitution; and when the Governor refused to meet
the requisition of the President for troops to sustain the national
flag, Hon. Frank P. Blair and other prominent citizens of the State,
replied, on their personal responsibility, that the quota of four
regiments should be raised, without either the aid of the Governor or
his consent. In order to give character and legality to their
proceedings, and to guard against the power of the State rulers, Captain
Nathaniel Lyon, of the United States army, then in command of the
Arsenal at St. Louis, was directed by the Government, on the 30th of
April, to enrol in the military service of the United States, from the
loyal citizens of the city and vicinity, 10,000 men, for the purpose of
maintaining the authority of the Government—for the protection of the
peaceable inhabitants of Missouri, and to guard against any attempt on
the part of the secessionists to gain military possession of the city of
St. Louis. Captain Lyon was also instructed that this force should be
disbanded when the emergency ceased to exist.

Recruiting offices were opened, under his direction, the loyal citizens
were prompt in their response, and on the 2d of May, Colonel F. B. Blair
announced that the four regiments called for from that State had been
enrolled, equipped, and mustered into service.

The Police Commissioners of St. Louis had called upon Captain Lyon, on
the opening of recruiting stations, and demanded the removal of the
United States troops from all places and buildings occupied by them in
the city outside of the Arsenal grounds, but he declined compliance, and
the Commissioners referred the matter to the Governor and the
Legislature, alleging that such occupancy was derogatory to the
Constitution of the United States—that Missouri had “sovereign and
exclusive jurisdiction over her entire territory,” and had delegated a
portion of that territory only (the Arsenals, etc.,) to the United
States for military purposes.




                        CAPTURE OF CAMP JACKSON.


In response to Governor Jackson’s order directing the military in
certain districts to go into encampments for the purpose of improvement
in the tactics of war, a camp had been formed at Lindell’s Grove, in the
suburbs of St. Louis, called “Camp Jackson.” On the 4th of May it was
inaugurated, under the charge of General D. M. Frost, and within a week
numbered 800 men. Having received intelligence that it was the purpose
of Captain Lyon to break up this encampment, General Frost addressed him
a letter, dissuasive in its tone—disclaiming any intention on the part
of himself and men of hostility to the Government, and containing an
offer to preserve the public peace and guard the property of the United
States.

The answer to this, was the surrounding of the camp by 5,000 Federal
troops, and the following notice from Captain Lyon:

“SIR,—Your command is regarded as hostile towards the Government of the
United States. It is, for the most part, made up of those who have
avowed their hostility to the General Government, and have been plotting
for the seizure of its property and the overthrow of its authority. You
are openly in communication with the so-called Southern Confederacy,
which is now at war with the United States, and you are receiving at
your camp, from the said Confederacy and under its flag, large supplies
of material of war, most of which is known to be the property of the
United States. These extraordinary preparations plainly indicate none
other than the well-known purpose of the Governor of this State, under
whose orders you are acting; and whose purpose, recently communicated to
the Legislature, has just been responded to by that body in the most
unparalleled legislation, having in direct view hostilities to the
General Government and co-operation with its enemies.”

Actuated by these considerations, and also by the failure to break up
the camp, in obedience to the Presidential Proclamation of April 15th,
Captain Lyon demanded its immediate surrender. After a hasty
consultation with his officers, General Frost complied, and the place
was surrendered unconditionally. But when the result was announced to
the troops, it was received with the wildest yells, curses and groans.
Some railed out against treachery, but the more loyal were rejoiced at
the prospect of escaping from what they denominated a school of
secession. Numbers of outsiders, also, when the news became known,
rushed into the camp and gave loud voice to their feelings of
indignation. The camp had in reality become a vast mob. Hurrahs for
Jeff. Davis were given—many of the now disarmed soldiers joining in
them. The United States troops were insulted in every possible manner,
and rowdyism ruled the hour triumphantly. Officers had broken their
swords and privates their guns before surrendering them. The task of
marching the men out was a work of great difficulty, but at last it was
accomplished, and the prisoners surrounded by two files of loyal troops.
This act brought the fury of the mob to a climax, and when most of the
troops had left, the few German soldiers that brought up the rear were
attacked by the crowd, and showers of stones rattled upon them. The
Federals presented their muskets, for the purpose of intimidating the
mob, but without avail. The order to fire at length became necessary. It
was given and executed with terrible effect, and the swiftly retreating
mob left behind them from thirty to forty of their number, either dead
or lying on the ground weltering in blood.

Many of the prisoners took the oath of fidelity to the Constitution and
the laws, and were set free. A large amount of arms, ammunition, stores,
camp equipage and stock was seized.

The event roused the secessionists in the city of St. Louis to the
highest fury, and the night was made hideous by bloody encounters, in
which several lives were lost.

The Legislature, then in session at Jefferson City, alarmed by these
vigorous measures on the part of the Government, passed, the same
afternoon, a “Military Bill,” authorizing the Governor to call out and
equip the State militia, and appropriating all the available funds of
the State for that purpose, in addition to the issuing of bonds to the
amount of $1,000,000, and authority to borrow $500,000 from the State
banks. The bill also gave to the Governor supreme authority in all
military matters, and subjected every able-bodied man in the State to
such authority, under penalty of $150 fine. The telegraph was seized by
order of Governor Jackson, and the bridges on roads leading from St.
Louis destroyed, from fear that Federal troops might reach Jefferson
City by railroad and arrest the conspirators.

The loyal citizens of St. Louis trembled for their safety—fearful alike
of an uprising of the secessionists in their midst and invasion from
without. The “Home Guard” was organized—a reserve of volunteers
proceeded to the arsenal for arms, and to take the oath of fealty, and
other measures adopted for defence. On the afternoon of the 11th, a body
composed mostly of Germans was assailed by a mob on their return from
the arsenal. A fierce struggled ensued, and several were killed on
either side.

The following day Brigadier-General Harney, of the regular army, reached
St. Louis, and assumed command of the Military Department. Being himself
a citizen of Missouri, and enjoying the confidence of the people in a
very large degree, his presence produced a marked and salutary effect.
By proclamation he demonstrated the madness and futility of any attempt
to withdraw the State from her allegiance, and gave warning that any
disturbance would be promptly suppressed. On the 14th he issued a second
proclamation, declaring the “Military Bill” in conflict with the
Constitution and laws of the United States, and therefore a
nullity—equivalent to an ordinance of secession, and cautioned all good
citizens against obeying it. The geographical position of the State, and
her best interests, he asserted, rendered it absolutely necessary that
she should remain in the Union, no matter what might be the position of
the cotton States; and he emphatically declared that the whole power of
the United States would be exerted, if necessary, to keep her within the
national domain.

But secession influences were exceedingly active in almost all parts of
the State, and the fact that the Governor and members of the Legislature
were disorganizers, occasioned great apprehension in regard to her
future destiny. The neighboring States of Iowa, Illinois, and Kansas
made tender of liberal aid to the loyal men of Missouri, whenever
required, to maintain their rights and their freedom. The secessionists
now threw off their disguise, and resorted to violent aggressions and
bitter persecutions of Union men. Many loyal citizens of Potosi,
Washington county, seventy miles from St. Louis, were driven from the
town, and their property injured or appropriated by the rebels.

Previous to the arrival of General Harney at St. Louis, Captain
Nathaniel Lyon was commissioned a brigadier-general, having command of
all the troops at St. Louis. On Tuesday, the 14th of May, he sent
Captain Cole, of the Fifth Missouri Volunteers, with one hundred and
fifty men, to Potosi, who surrounded the town before daylight, and
arrested about one hundred and fifty persons. They were marched to the
court-house, and fifty of them required to give parole not to take up
arms against the Government. Nine of the leaders were taken to the St.
Louis arsenal. On his return to St. Louis, Captain Cole led his troop
through De Soto, Jefferson county, where a body of secession cavalry was
collected, who fled at his approach. Thirty of their horses were
captured by Captain Cole, and a large secession flag seized, which they
had just raised on a pole in the town, and the stars and stripes
elevated in its place.

On the 21st of May, General Harney was induced by Price to enter into an
arrangement which was professedly designed to “allay excitement,” and
“restore peace;” and for this common object, the “general officers of
the Federal and State Governments were to be respected.” Price was
recognized as “having by commission full authority over the militia of
the State,” to direct the whole power of the State officers, and to
maintain order. General Harney admitted that this, faithfully performed,
was all he required; and that he had no wish to make any “military
movements” on his part. This was all that Price desired. Having by these
plausible pretences tied the hands of General Harney, knowing that he
would regard his obligations, the secession leaders continued their
plots, and took measures for consummating the rebellion in the State.
Loyal men in Missouri, as well as in other States, soon perceived the
situation of affairs. The General Government became cognizant of the
embarrassment in which General Harney was placed, and to release him
from his engagements with General Price, as well as to secure the most
efficient action at this stage of the rebellion, relieved him and
appointed General Lyon to the command. Under his administration,
vigorous, all-observant, prompt, and decisive, General Price found
himself under a pressure very different from what he had anticipated.

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS, AND THE ISLANDS BY THEIR
    NUMBERS.
]

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS, AND THE ISLANDS BY THEIR
    NUMBERS.
]




                                 CAIRO.


The most important strategic point in the West at this time was the city
of Cairo, situated at the extreme southern point of the State of
Illinois, at the junction of the Ohio and Mississippi rivers, where the
latter river separates it from Missouri, and the former from Kentucky.
It completely commands both streams, and in a military point of view may
be properly considered as the key to what is usually denominated “the
Great North-west.”

The Illinois Central railroad connects it with Chicago, the greatest
grain city of the world—with Lake Michigan, and the chain of lakes, and
with the vast net work of railroads that branch from thence eastward. On
the Missouri bank of the Mississippi river, two miles distant, is Ohio
city, the initial point of the Cairo and Fulton railroad, designed to be
extended to the Red river, in Arkansas, and thence to Galveston, in
Texas. Twenty miles below, on the Kentucky side of the same giant river,
is Columbus, which was soon after occupied and fortified by the rebel
troops.

As soon as General Lyon was vested with supreme command in Missouri, one
of his first steps was to order a body of Federal troops to take
possession of Cairo, under General Prentiss, who immediately proceeded
thither, with 6,000 men, and commenced fortifying the place.

On the 28th of May, Bird’s Point, on the Missouri side of the river, a
commanding position, was also occupied, by direction of General Lyon, by
the Fourth Missouri Volunteers, under the command of Colonel Schuttner.

On the 11th of June, Governor Jackson, at his own instance, accompanied
by General Price, had an interview with General Lyon and Colonel Blair
at St. Louis, when he requested that the United States troops should be
withdrawn from the soil of Missouri. General Lyon, as well as Colonel
Blair, were equally blind to the advantages of this movement, and could
not be made to see how the Government or the State of Missouri could be
benefitted by a surrender of the field to the secessionists. Jackson and
Price, finding their negotiations altogether vain, and under a previous
arrangement that they were not to be arrested or interfered with before
the 12th, returned to Jefferson City on the same night, and prepared for
an immediate hostile demonstration. General Lyon, convinced that the
only effective treatment demanded by the occasion consisted in an
instant arrest of the conspirators, if possible, started up the river,
and occupied Jefferson City on the 15th, the place having been abandoned
by the rebels. On the 16th, he started in pursuit of Price and Jackson,
and on the 17th landed about four miles below Booneville, where their
forces were collected, and had resolved to make a stand.




                         BATTLE OF BOONEVILLE.

                             JUNE 17, 1861.


The enemy were exceedingly well posted, having had every advantage in
the selection of their position. They occupied the summit of the ground,
which rises upward from the river in a long slope, and were prepared to
give the loyal troops a warm reception. General Lyon opened a heavy
cannonade against the rebels, who retreated and dispersed into the
adjacent wood, where, hidden by bushes and trees, they opened a brisk
fire on his troops.

Arriving at the brow of the ascent, Captain Totten renewed the
engagement by throwing a few nine-pounder explosives into their ranks,
while the infantry filed oblique right and left and commenced a terrible
volley of musketry, which was, for a short time, well replied to. The
enemy were posted in a lane running towards the river from the road
along which the army of the United States were advancing, and in a brick
house on the north-east corner of the junction of the two roads. A
couple of bombs were thrown through the east wall of that house,
scattering the rebels in all directions. The well-directed fire of the
German infantry, Lieutenant-Colonel Schaeffer, on the right, and General
Lyon’s company of regulars and part of Colonel Blair’s regiment on the
left of the road, soon compelled the enemy to seek a safer position.
They clambered over the fence into a field of wheat, and again formed in
line just on the brow of the hill. They then advanced some twenty steps
to meet the Federal troops, and for a short time the artillery was
worked with great rapidity and effect. Just at this time the enemy
opened fire from a grove on the left of Lyon’s centre, and from a shed
beyond and still further to the left.

General Lyon halted, faced his troops about, and bringing his artillery
to bear, opened fire on the rebels, and after a short engagement, killed
thirty-five and took thirty prisoners, while the remainder fled in all
directions, leaving many of their guns on the field. This accomplished,
the General moved forward and took possession of the town. Neither
General Price nor Governor Jackson were on the field of battle, though
the latter was a spectator, and took an early opportunity to withdraw.

On the 17th of June, Colonel Boernstein was appointed Military Governor
at Jefferson City, including Cole and the adjoining counties, the
Governor and officers of the State having fled. Colonel Boernstein, on
being questioned as to how long he should remain, replied, “I don’t
know, perhaps a year; so long as the Governor chooses to stay away. I am
Governor now, you see, till he comes back!” His idea of freedom of
speech and the press he expressed freely, like this: “All people zall
speak vot dey tink, write vot dey pleazhe, and be free to do any tink
dey pleazhe—_only dey zall speak and write no treason_!”

The loyal people of the State now entered with zeal into the work of
defence. Union Home Guards were organized at Hannibal, Herman, Rolla,
Potosi, and many other places, and troops stationed at various points,
of which two thousand five hundred kept guard over the Hannibal and St.
Joseph, and one thousand over the North Missouri railroad; three
thousand took their position also at Rolla, on the south-west branch of
the Pacific railroad.

At Booneville, on the 18th, General Lyon issued a proclamation, in which
he exposed the misrepresentations of the conspirators. The views they
had endeavored to inculcate, that the United States would overrun the
State with “military despotism,” and “destroy State rights,” were
pronounced false—the glaring inconsistencies of the secessionists
exposed,—and all malcontents solicited to return to their allegiance to
the old flag.

On the same day, eight hundred Union Home Guards, under Captain Cooke,
at Camp Cole, were surprised and routed by a body of rebels from Warsaw.
Twenty-five were killed, fifty-two wounded, and twenty-three taken
prisoners. The rebel loss was forty-five killed and wounded. At this
time, Colonel Siegel, General Sweeney, and Colonel Brown, with their
commands, were in the south-western part of the State, keeping the
insurgents at bay.

General Price and Jackson were employed in raising all the turbulent
elements of the State, and rallying followers to their standard. They
were also greatly inspirited in their labors by the rumor that Ben.
McCulloch was approaching with eight or ten thousand men to aid them in
the overthrow of the government. On the 3d of July, General Lyon left
Booneville with two thousand men, for the south-west. General Sweeney,
who was in command of the south-west expedition, at Springfield,
published a proclamation to the people, inviting them to remain loyal,
and warning all rebels to disperse, take the oath of allegiance, and
escape the penalties of their lawless career.




                          BATTLE OF CARTHAGE.

                             JULY 4, 1861.


Colonel Siegel arrived at Springfield on the 23d of June, and there
learned that the rebel troops, under Jackson, were making their way
southwardly through Cedar county. He immediately proceeded with his
command, numbering over a thousand men, and a small field battery,
towards Mount Vernon, for the purpose of intercepting him. On arriving
at that point, he learned that General Price, in command of one thousand
two hundred of the State troops, was encamped at Neosho, the county seat
of Newton county, situated in the south-west corner of the State. His
object there was to prevent Jackson going south, or Price going north.
He appears to have decided to move southwardly and capture Price if
possible, and afterwards attend to the Governor.

As he neared Neosho, on the 30th, the reports began to come in of the
strength of Price, until his force was swelled to thirty-five hundred
men, including Arkansas volunteers. The inhabitants expressed their
welcome for Colonel Siegel, and detailed the most pitiable accounts of
the oppression of the rebel soldiers.

On the 1st of July, the entire force entered the town without
opposition, and encamped there, the enemy having retreated.

On the 2d, Colonel Siegel, learning that the forces of Price, Rains and
Jackson had united at Dry Fork Creek, eight miles from Carthage, and
having communicated with and received orders from Brig.-Gen. Sweeney,
proceeded at once to attack them. He took up his line of march on the
3d, and on the morning of the 4th came upon the enemy, who were in great
force.

The Federal command was about one thousand two hundred strong, including
part of Colonel Salomon’s regiment. They met the enemy in camp on an
open prairie, three miles beyond Dry Fork, and after approaching within
eight hundred yards, took position. The artillery was placed in the
front; two six-pounders on the left, two six and two twelve-pounders in
the centre, and two six-pounders on the right.

The fight commenced about half-past nine, the balls and shells of the
enemy flying over the Union troops, and exploding in the open prairie.

At eleven o’clock the rebel twelve-pounders were silenced, and much
disorder visible. About two o’clock the enemy’s cavalry having attempted
to outflank the Federal troops, they fell back upon their baggage trains
to prevent their capture, Colonel Siegel changing his front. Proceeding
in their retreat without serious casualty, they reached Dry Fork Creek,
where eight hundred rebel cavalry had concentrated to cut them off; but
a cross-fire of canister and shrapnell soon broke their ranks, and they
fell into wild confusion. Thence the Federal troops proceeded toward
Carthage. Just before entering the town, Siegel posted three companies
at Buck Creek, while the residue, in two columns, made a circuit around
the town, the artillery pouring in a well-directed fire on the pursuing
enemy. Night was approaching as the retreating army passed through
Carthage, while the rebel horsemen withdrew to the woods on the Mount
Vernon road.

Colonel Sigel, notwithstanding the great fatigue of the day—his men
having been in action nearly twelve hours, and suffering severely from
the heat and from lack of water—ordered his men to press on in retreat
from Carthage. A forced march was made to Sarcoxie, in the south-east
corner of Jasper county, (Carthage being the county seat,) a distance of
twelve or fourteen miles. There they went into camp at three o’clock
Saturday morning. In the afternoon of the next day, the retreat was
continued to Mount Vernon, in Lawrence county, sixteen or eighteen miles
east of Sarcoxie, where Siegel took a stand, and where his headquarters
were located.

The Union loss was thirteen killed and thirty-one wounded; while,
according to the most reliable accounts, the loss of the enemy could not
have been less than three hundred in killed and wounded, and forty-five
prisoners.




                         BATTLE AT MONROE, MO.

                             JULY 10, 1861.


Before daylight, on the morning of the 10th, Colonel Smith, with about
six hundred men of the Sixteenth Illinois Volunteers, while encamped
near Monroe Station, thirty miles west of Hannibal, was attacked by one
thousand six hundred rebels under the command of Governor Harris. After
a successful skirmish with the enemy, Colonel Smith retired to the
Academy buildings for greater security. Here he was again attacked by an
increased force of the rebels, and again succeeded in repulsing them.
Determined on keeping them at bay, he sent messengers to Hannibal and
other places for reinforcements, while the long-range rifles of his men
told with fearful effect on his besiegers, and rendered two inferior
pieces of artillery which they had brought to bear on him of but little
use.

Three companies from Hannibal arrived first to the rescue, with two
pieces of cannon of superior power to that of the enemy, and Colonel
Smith immediately assumed the offensive. Toward evening, a body of
cavalry under the command of Governor Wood, of Illinois, arrived and
fell upon the rear of the enemy, when the struggle soon ended, and the
rebel besiegers fled, with a loss of thirty killed and wounded,
seventy-five prisoners, one gun, and a large number of horses. Of the
Union troops, but four or five were severely wounded—none killed.




                      GUERRILLA BANDS IN MISSOURI.


In consequence of the disorganized condition of society in this State,
bands of armed rebels took occasion to commit depredations upon the
loyal citizens. Skirmishes became frequent, terror took the place of
security, and distrust that of confidence. Men once high in public
opinion and the councils of the nation became leaders in revolt, and
encouraged by their example, the rabble threw off all restraint, and
boldly became banditti.

Brigadier-General Pope was assigned command in northern Missouri, and
from his headquarters at St. Charles, issued a proclamation, assuring
loyal citizens of protection, and threatening disorganizers and
secessionists with severe punishment. The State Convention assembled on
the 22d of July, at Jefferson City, and passed an ordinance on the 23d
by a vote of sixty-five to twenty-one, declaring the office of President
of their body, held by General Sterling Price, to be vacant, and elected
General Robert Wilson, a firm Union man, in his place. A committee of
seven—one from each Congressional district, was appointed to report what
action was necessary for the State to take in the crisis, and prepare an
address to the people. The report was made, Union in all its bearings,
and the Convention adjourned.

Major-General Fremont arrived at St. Louis on Sunday the 25th, and
assumed military command.

The month of July was prolific in proclamations from the commanders of
the rebel forces as well as of the Federal troops. On the 30th of July,
rebel regiments from Tennessee, Mississippi and Kentucky, occupied New
Madrid, on the Mississippi river, in the southern extremity of the
State, and fortified it, and General Gideon J. Pillow issued a
manifesto, in which he called upon the men of Missouri to enter his
ranks. On the 1st of August, Jefferson Thompson, not to be outdone in
the declamatory department, also issued a fiery proclamation.

Depredations had become so numerous and troublesome on the line of the
Hannibal and St. Joseph’s railroad, that General Pope appointed General
S. A. Hurlbut to guard it, and divided it into sections, notifying the
people that all who had property and interests at stake, would be
expected to take an active part in their own protection and security.
Citizens were appointed district superintendents.

The Address of the State Convention was published on the 31st of the
month, and presented the question before the people in a masterly and
able manner. The rebel Lieutenant-Governor, Thomas C. Reynolds, found
refuge under the protection of General Pillow, at New Madrid, and on the
same day, in the absence of Governor Jackson, issued a treasonable
proclamation to the people of the State.

While these events were transpiring in other parts of the State, General
Lyon had concentrated his forces at Springfield. Although he had perfect
confidence in the bravery and discipline of his troops, he yet felt his
inability to cope successfully with the superior numbers that he was
warned were marching against him, and appealed to General Fremont to
reinforce him. This General Fremont declined to do, alleging as a reason
that his best regiments had been withdrawn to Washington and Cairo—to
important points in the vicinity of St. Louis and the district under
General Pope, that required to be guarded; and General Lyon and his
little handful of brave men were left to meet, as best they might, the
fast accumulating forces of the enemy who were bent on their
destruction.




                         BATTLE OF DUG SPRINGS.

                            AUGUST 2, 1861.


General Lyon being thus compelled to act, and relying upon the
steadiness and efficiency of his army and superior artillery, decided to
meet the advancing foe with his small force, rather than retreat and
leave a large district of country exposed to secession ravages. In order
to meet the enemy on an open field he led his army as far south as Crane
Creek, 10 miles below Springfield. The march commenced at 5 o’clock, on
the afternoon of August 1st. The weather was intensely hot—the baggage
wagons were scattered over a distance of three miles—the march slow, and
one of great fatigue; and it was not until 10 o’clock that the camping
ground was reached and the march ended, only to be resumed on the
following morning, under a burning sun and with but a very scanty supply
of water. Slight skirmishes occurred during the day, but the shells of
Captain Totten’s battery caused a hasty retreat on the part of the
rebels. On the arrival at Dug Springs the advance continued on, while
the skirmishers maintained a brisk fire with the retreating pickets of
the enemy; Captain Steele’s regular infantry taking the lead to the
left, supported by a company of cavalry, the rest of the column being
some distance in the rear. A body of rebel infantry were now seen
approaching from the woods with the design of cutting off the Union
forces. Captain Stanley drew up his cavalry, and opened upon them with
Sharp’s carbines. It was a desperate undertaking to keep the rebels in
check—scarce one hundred Union cavalry against more than five times that
number of the enemy. The rebel infantry kept up the firing for some
minutes, when an enthusiastic lieutenant, giving the order to “charge,”
some twenty-five of the gallant regulars rushed forward upon the enemy’s
lines, and, dashing aside the threatening bayonets of the sturdy rebels,
hewed down the ranks with fearful slaughter. Captain Stanley, who was
amazed at the temerity of the little band, was obliged to sustain the
order, but before he could reach his company they had broken the ranks
of the enemy, who outnumbered them as twenty to one. Some of the rebels
who were wounded asked, in utter astonishment, “whether these were men
or devils—they fight so?”

The ground was left in possession of the Unionists, strewed with arms,
and the men were seizing the horses and mules that had been left, when a
large force of the enemy’s cavalry were seen approaching—some three
hundred or more. At the instant when they had formed, in an angle,
Captain Totten, who had mounted a six and twelve-pounder upon the
overlooking hill, sent a shell directly over them; in another minute,
the second, a twelve-pound shell, landed at their feet, exploding, and
scattering the whole body in disorder. The third, fourth, fifth and
sixth were sent into their midst. The horsemen could not control their
horses, and in a minute not an enemy was to be seen anywhere.

The Union loss was four killed and five wounded, one of whom
subsequently died, while that of the enemy was very heavy, fully forty
killed and an hundred wounded.

Having routed the enemy, General Lyon continued his march until he
arrived at Curran, in Stone county, twenty-six miles from Springfield,
where he encamped in order to avail himself of a choice of position.
Here, from information that had been obtained of the opposing force and
movements, a consultation was held with Generals Sweeney and Sigel, and
Majors Schofield, Shepherd, Conant and Sturgis, and Captains Totten and
Schaeffer, when it was determined to retire towards Springfield. The
enemy was threatening a flank movement, and the necessity of keeping a
communication open with Springfield was apparent to all the officers,
and induced General Lyon to return to that point. An important
consideration was, their provisions had to be transported one hundred
miles—the depot being at Rolla—and the men were exhausted with the
excessive heat, labors and privations of the campaign.

On the 5th of August they encamped at and near Springfield, and awaited
the expected encounter with firm hearts, resolute bearing, and a
determination to do or die.




                     SKIRMISH AT ATHENS, MISSOURI.

                            AUGUST 5, 1861.


While General Lyon and his noble associates were preparing to repel the
anticipated attack of the forces of McCullough and Price, another event
occurred that demands attention, and we turn to the town of Athens,
situated on the Des Moines river, twenty-five or thirty miles from
Keokuk, Iowa.

For three or four weeks that portion of Missouri had been in a state of
anarchy. There had been no security for life or property, nor any
effectual efforts made to enforce the laws and restore order. Actual
force had not as yet been resorted to, but the secessionists,
determining to drive the Unionists out of the country, had visited their
houses in squads—insulted the women, and threatened death, both by the
rifle and rope, unless their orders to leave the country were complied
with. Union men and their families, thus kept in a state of perpetual
alarm, in many instances abandoned their homes and possessions, and
obeying the cruel command, left the State. Some determined men, however,
resolved not to be trampled to the earth without resistance, and formed
companies of “Home Guards;” but they were powerless to protect
themselves or friends from assassination, and being scattered far apart,
were almost useless in a sudden emergency. Day by day the rebels became
more bold, until finally the Unionists went into camp, at the town of
Cahokia, eighteen miles from the Mississippi, in Clarke county, about
six hundred strong, with a brave commander who had seen service in
Mexico. They soon received two hundred and forty stand of arms from St.
Louis, and thus became, in a measure, prepared to protect themselves and
sustain their country’s honor.

In the mean time, the rebels had formed a camp at Monticello, the county
seat of Lewis county, about thirty miles south of Cahokia, under Martin
Green, a brother of the ex-Senator.

A few days subsequently the Unionists received word that Green was about
to attack them with eight hundred men, and sent to Keokuk and Warsaw for
assistance. Keokuk did not respond, but the Warsaw Grays, Captain
Coster, fifty in number, went over to the Union camp, though with the
intention of acting only on the defensive; but no enemy appearing,
Colonel Moore determined to rout the prowling bands of secessionists who
were hovering around him, and for three days his men searched in vain to
find an enemy to give them battle. Numerous secessionists were arrested,
but liberated on taking the required oath, and Moore finally marched his
command to Athens. A peace in the vicinity was proposed by the enemy,
with the object of lulling the suspicions of the Union men, and inducing
them to disperse; and through these influences the Colonel soon found
his forces dwindled down to one-half their original number.

But Green had not been idle. Constant recruiting had increased his force
to nearly fifteen hundred men, and he visited Scotland and Knox
counties, driving out the loyal citizens, insulting and abusing their
families, and committing fearful depredations upon them. At length it
was evident that he was about to attack the Unionists at Athens, and
again they sent to Keokuk for assistance. Seventy of the militia from
that place went up to Croton, a small town on the Iowa side of the Des
Moines river, opposite Athens, but refused to cross. Moore, however,
received reinforcements until his command reached four hundred, and
encamped in the town, awaiting the moment of action, with his main force
stationed on a street parallel to, and his right and left wings
extending to the river.

There and in this order the Federalists were attacked by a force of from
twelve to fifteen hundred men, with no chance of retreat, except by
fording a stream fully three hundred yards in width, and exposed to a
murderous fire. They were without artillery, while the enemy had an
eight-pounder, which was placed on the brow of the hill, in a position
to rake the principal street, while two imitation guns were placed in
sight, intended to inspire a fear, which few men of that little band
were capable of experiencing. The attack opened between five and six
o’clock in the morning. At its very commencement, Lieutenant-Colonel
Callahan, who commanded a company of cavalry in the rebel ranks, retired
across the river and continued his flight until he reached the
Mississippi river at Montrose.

A portion of Moore’s infantry were also seized with a momentary panic,
and fled across the river; but on seeing their companions stand firm,
many returned and took part in the action. About three hundred only of
the Unionists bore the brunt, and firm as regulars, delivered their fire
with coolness and precision.

The fight, regular and irregular, lasted about an hour and a half, and
then Colonel Moore led his centre to a charge, which routed the enemy,
and left him and his brave associates undisputed masters of the field.
The loss of the Unionists was ten killed and the same number wounded,
and that of the rebels fourteen killed and forty wounded.




                       BATTLE OF WILSON’S CREEK.

                            AUGUST 10, 1861.


General Lyon having returned to Springfield after his expedition to
Curran, found himself greatly embarrassed by his position, and was
forced by circumstances to determine the question whether he should,
with his inferior force, give battle to the enemy now pressing upon him,
or attempt a retreat to Rolla, encumbered with an immense train, and
exposed to the probability of being compelled to defend himself at any
point on the route where they might see fit to attack him. Their cavalry
force was large, and with this they could by their celerity of movement
cut off his communication and flank him whenever disposed. His appeals
for reinforcements had not been granted, yet he was daily indulging the
hope that he would soon be furnished a sufficient force to enable him to
meet the enemy with a reasonable prospect of success. The days were
passing on, the enemy was drawing nearer, and General Lyon was compelled
to make his decision. The alternative was before him, either to retreat
and leave the finest section of the State open to the ravages of the
enemy, or make the attempt to expel the foe, even though he might
sacrifice his own army in the effort. On the afternoon of the ninth of
August, he held a consultation with his officers, when after a full
discussion of the question, it was deemed advisable to attack the enemy
in his camp at Wilson’s Creek, nine miles south of Springfield. The
attack was to be made simultaneously by two columns, at daylight on the
following morning, Saturday the 10th; the first under command of General
Lyon and the second under General Sigel.

The rebel leaders were Generals Sterling Price, Ben McCulloch and
Brigadier-General John B. Clark. Somewhat singularly, both parties had
planned an attack at the same hour, but the darkness of the night
induced the rebels to postpone their movement. Their tents were pitched
on either side of Wilson’s Creek, extending a mile east and south of the
road, crossing to two miles west and north of the same, the creek
running nearly in the shape of a horizontal ᔕ. At the crossing of the
Fayette road the hills on each side of the stream are from two to three
hundred feet high, sloping gently on the north, and abrupt to the south
side. The valley is about half a mile wide.

While on the verge of this, his last engagement, General Lyon was
impressed with a sad presentiment—not regarding his own fate—but a fear
for his brave command. A terrible responsibility rested upon him. With
no adequate strength with which to cope with the enemy, hemmed in and
growing weaker every day, his position was both perilous and painful.
Unsupported, with his cry for help passed over, he saw nothing before
him but the barren satisfaction of dying, bravely performing his duty,
and protecting to the last the little army that he felt to be doomed.
With these feelings—sadly bitter they must have been—this glorious man
entered upon his last battle field.

The following day was one of remarkable quiet, and enlistments in the
Springfield regiment went on rapidly. During the afternoon, Captain
Woods’ Kansas cavalry, with one or two companies of regulars, drove five
hundred rebel rangers from the prairie west of the town, capturing eight
and killing two men, without loss on their part.

At eight o’clock in the evening, General Sigel, with six pieces of
artillery and part of Colonel Salomon’s command, moved southward,
marching until near two o’clock, and passing around the extreme camp of
the enemy, where he halted, ready to press forward as soon as he should
be apprised by the roar of General Lyon’s artillery that the attack had
begun. The main body, under General Lyon, had moved at the same time,
and halted about five miles west of the city, from whence, after
resting, they proceeded again about four miles in a south-westerly
direction, and slept until 4 A. M. on Saturday, the day of battle.

At five o’clock the pickets of the enemy were driven in, and the
northern end of the valley, with its thousands of tents and camp-fires,
became visible, and this most destructive battle, when the numbers
engaged are considered, commenced. The roar of the artillery was
terrible,—the rattling of the musketballs was like a storm of great
hailstones, and the clash of steel like hammers ringing on countless
anvils.

Riding forward in the thick of the fight, his war-horse bearing him more
proudly than usual that fatal day, General Lyon performed the work of a
dozen heroes. A stern sadness was on his face—a resolute fire burned in
the gray depths of his eyes. Twice was he wounded, leading on his men,
and his war-steed fell under him, pierced to the heart with a bullet.
Those who loved him grew anxious for his safety, for there was something
wonderful in the steady courage that made him forget the wounds that
would have driven another man from the field.

A member of his staff approached him as he stood by his dead horse, and
seeing blood upon his forehead, asked if he was hurt.

“I think not seriously,” he answered; and mounting another horse, he
plunged again into the terrible melee.

At one time, when the whirlwind of battle was at its height, General
Lyon desired his men to prepare for a charge, and the Iowans at once
volunteered to go, and asked for a leader. On came the enemy, crushing
in their strength, and there was no time for choice.

“I will lead you,” exclaimed the impetuous and fearless General. “Come
on, brave boys,” said he, as he took his position in the van, while
General Sweeney prepared to lead on a portion of the Kansas troops, and
the serried ranks of glittering deadly steel resistlessly moved on.

In the very act of leading those valiant men, with his hand uplifted in
an effort to cheer them on, and his noble face turned partly to his
command, but not altogether away from the enemy, a bullet pierced him,
and he fell, regretted not only by his devoted little army, but by every
man, woman and child who ever heard how bravely he fought for the flag
they love.

The battle continued from six until eleven o’clock, with but little
cessation; and then the gallant Unionists, overwhelmed by superior
numbers, were forced to retreat. In good order they accomplished it, and
_the enemy made no attempt to follow_, though their combined forces
amounted to about 20,000, while General Lyon’s command did not exceed
one-quarter of that number.

[Illustration:

  DEATH OF GENERAL LYON.
]

The Federal loss was 223 killed, 721 wounded and 292 missing; the rebel
loss, (McCulloch’s report,) 265 killed, 800 wounded, 30 missing; Price’s
report of Missouri troops, 156 killed and 517 wounded.

The death of the brave General Lyon was universally deplored. Countless
were the tributes to his memory, and deep the sorrow when his body was
borne homeward, surrounded with military honors. From amid the murky
smoke and fearful glare of battle his soul was called home—the flashing
eye dimmed—the good right hand unnerved, and the fiery spirit, that
scorned danger and hated treason, was quenched forever.


                        SKETCH OF GENERAL LYON.

Brigadier-General Nathaniel Lyon was born in the State of Connecticut,
in the year 1818, and entered the military academy at West Point in
1837, where he graduated four years afterwards with the rank of
Second-Lieutenant of the Second Infantry. In February, 1847, he was made
First-Lieutenant, and for gallant conduct in the battles of Contreras
and Cherubusco, during the following August, was breveted Captain. On
the 13th of September he was severely wounded in a most desperate
assault, and in June, 1851, was promoted to a captaincy, which rank he
held at the time of the troubles in Kansas. As has been stated, he was
in command of the Missouri Volunteers at the capture of Camp Jackson,
and was for his well-proven bravery and eminent ability, promoted to the
rank which he held at the time of his death. In personal appearance he
was about five feet and eight inches in height, his frame wiry and
muscular. His hair was long and thick, his whiskers sandy and heavy, and
his eyes of a blueish gray. His forehead was high and broad, with a firm
expression of the lips, and a countenance that indicated an intellect of
no ordinary capacity. He was a strict disciplinarian, endeared to his
soldiers, and universally regretted by the whole country which followed
him to the grave with deep and mournful affection. In his will, made
before he started on his last campaign, he left his entire property to
the country for which he gave his life.


                       RETREAT OF THE UNION ARMY.

The Federal troops remained in Springfield until Monday morning, and
then started on their retreat towards Rolla, unmolested by the rebels.
The enemy entered the town immediately after its evacuation by the
Federal forces, having suffered the loss of a large portion of their
tents, baggage and camp stores by the attack of Sigel.

Hundreds of the inhabitants of this section were now compelled to leave
their homes, and the exiles were seen every day on the roads leading to
St. Louis, fleeing for refuge beyond the lines of the insurgents,
plundered of everything and destitute, having been forced to abandon
their homes and property to save their lives.

The loyal people who remained were favored with proclamations by
McCulloch and Price, which abounded in abuse and misrepresentation of
the Federal army, and were filled with professions and promises which
strikingly contrasted with their administration and conduct.

This calamity was not merely disastrous by its positive loss, but it
gave a prestige of success to the rebel leaders, and afforded an
opportunity for them to increase the spirit of rebellion among the
people, as well as to nerve themselves to other enterprises. On the
17th, fifteen hundred recruits had assembled in Saline county, and were
preparing to join General Price, or to engage in local operations in the
surrounding counties. On the 18th, about one thousand men from Chariton
county crossed the Missouri at Brunswick, with a large number of horses
and wagons, on their march to join Price’s division.

The rebels were so much elated with the death of General Lyon and the
abandonment of Springfield by the Federal troops, that they became more
reckless than ever in their depredations and persecutions of the loyal
citizens. In St. Louis on the 14th, after the retreat became known, they
became so bold and defiant that General Fremont proclaimed martial law,
and appointed Major J. McKinstry as Provost-Marshal.

On the 20th, a train on the Hannibal and St. Joseph’s railroad was fired
into, and one soldier killed and six wounded. The train was immediately
stopped, and two of the guerrillas were killed and five captured.

Five days afterwards, on the 25th, Governor Gamble issued a proclamation
calling for forty-two thousand volunteers to defend the State, restore
peace and subdue the insurrection; the term of service to be six months,
unless sooner discharged.




                               KENTUCKY.


Kentucky occupies a central position among the States, and is about four
hundred miles in length, by one hundred and seventy in width at the
widest point, where the State stretches from the boundary of Tennessee
across to Covington, opposite Cincinnati, on the Ohio river. This river,
from the Virginia line, follows a circuitous course along the Kentucky
border, a distance of six hundred and thirty-seven miles, until it flows
into the Mississippi at Cairo. The Cumberland and Tennessee rivers pass
through the western part of the State, as they approach their confluence
with the Ohio. Big Sandy river, two hundred and fifty miles in length,
forms for a considerable distance the boundary between Kentucky and
Virginia. The Kentucky river rises in the Cumberland Mountains and falls
into the Ohio river fifty miles above Louisville. These geographical
facts are necessary to a perfect understanding of the struggles in that
State, and are worthy of remembrance.

When the President of the United States, on the 15th of April, 1861,
issued his proclamation, in which the Governors of the States that had
not already committed themselves to the cause of secession, were called
upon to furnish their quota of seventy-five thousand men for the
national defence, Beriah Magoffin, Governor of Kentucky, replied by
saying, that, “Kentucky will furnish no troops for the wicked purpose of
subduing her sister States.”

This act was looked upon with both sorrow and surprise by the loyal
people of that State, and was hailed with delight by the Confederate
Government at Montgomery. The rebel Secretary of War congratulated
Governor Magoffin on his “patriotic” response, informed him that
Virginia needed aid, and requested him to send forward a regiment of
infantry without delay to Harper’s Ferry. Though sympathizing with the
enemies of the Union, Governor Magoffin was not prepared to set at
defiance the wishes of the people of Kentucky, and commit himself
unqualifiedly to the work of overthrowing the Federal Government.

Many of the prominent men of Kentucky, including a large number of the
wealthy citizens, were zealous in the promotion of the secession
interests. The most indefatigable efforts were made by them to force the
State into the ranks of the revolted States, and thousands of her young
men were induced to enlist, and encamp on the adjoining borders of
Tennessee, waiting for the hour when they could sweep Kentucky with the
rush of armed battalions, and overwhelm her peace and prosperity with
the clash of arms, and the thunders of artillery. The loyal sentiment
was, however, in the ascendant, although it was subdued and overawed to
a considerable extent. Between the two forces, therefore, it was deemed
expedient by her rulers that Kentucky should hold a neutral position,
and not ally herself with either the Federal or the Confederate
interest.

To render this neutrality more certain, on the 8th of June, General S.
B. Buckner, then the acknowledged commander of the State militia,
entered into negotiations with General McClellan, at Cincinnati, the
terms of which stipulated that Kentucky should protect the United States
property, and enforce all the United States laws within her limits—that
her neutrality should be respected by the Federal army, _even though the
Southern forces should occupy her soil_; “but in the latter case General
McClellan should call upon the authorities of the State to remove the
said Southern forces from her territory;” if the State were unable to
accomplish this, then the Federal forces might be called in.

This negative position was found, however, to be one of positive
advantage and aid to the traitors. They desired to secure a “masterly
inactivity” on the part of loyal men, of which they might avail
themselves by secret organizations. Taking advantage of this confessed
neutrality, large numbers of the young men of Kentucky were enticed into
Buckner’s camp; while bodies of men from Tennessee were thrown into
several localities in the southern and western portions of the State,
and boldly avowed their determination to march on Frankfort, the
capital, and revolutionize the State. Home Guards were organized by the
loyal men, and it became apparent, that if the tide were not resisted by
active measures, there was no security for Kentucky.

The election for members of the Legislature, however, early in August,
the result of which showed an overwhelming majority in favor of the
Union, signed the death-warrant of neutrality, and thenceforth Kentucky
was regarded as loyal to the Union. The Legislature assembled at
Frankfort on the 5th of September, ordered the United States flag to be
hoisted on the court-house, and proceeded to adopt various measures
calculated to promote the Union cause in the State.

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS.
]

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS.
]

The great Union majority now revealed gave such decided evidence that
Kentucky was not likely to be seduced from her loyalty, that the
secessionists became convinced of the necessity of accomplishing their
purpose by other means. The rebel forces were, therefore, ordered to
take possession of several important points, which they did on the 4th
of September, and commenced fortifying Hickman and Columbus—the former
being in the western part of the State, near the line, and the latter
some twenty-five miles further north, on the Mississippi river. Generals
Pillow and Polk now took command of the rebel troops, and were soon
reinforced, their combined forces amounting to thirteen regiments of
artillery, six field batteries, a siege battery, three battalions of
cavalry, three steamers, and a gunboat. In the mean time, Jefferson
Thompson, with two regiments, took possession of Belmont, on the
Missouri side, opposite Columbus. The assumed neutrality having thus
been broken by this invasion, the Federal commander, General U. S.
Grant, then at Cairo, Illinois, lost no time in making a movement to
intercept the further progress of the rebels northward. He accordingly
sent a sufficient force up the Ohio, to the mouth of the Tennessee
river, and effected




                       THE OCCUPATION OF PADUCAH.


On Thursday evening, the 5th of September, the gunboats Tyler and
Conestoga were ordered to convey the troops to Paducah. The Ninth
Illinois, under the gallant Major Philips, and the Twelfth Illinois,
Colonel John McArthur, with four pieces of Smith’s Chicago Artillery,
under Lieutenant Charles Willard, embarked on the steamers G. W. Graham
and W. H. B., and left Cairo at 11 o’clock, P. M., the gunboat Tyler,
Captain Rogers, leading, and the Conestoga, Captain Phelps, in the rear.
The fleet pushed out into the stream amid the cheers of thousands of
spectators, and steamed grandly up the Ohio.

They reached Paducah about eight o’clock, A. M., on Friday, the 6th. The
troops were speedily disembarked. Colonel McArthur’s regiment landed at
the Marine Hospital, in the lower part of the city, and the Ninth at the
foot of Main street. The Twelfth found quarters at the hospital, and the
Ninth repaired to the depot of the Ohio and New Orleans railroad. The
citizens were sullen and unfriendly, and closed their places of
business.

On arriving at the depot the troops found that the rolling stock of the
road had all been removed, but a large quantity of stores for the
confederate army was discovered, and promptly seized. They were marked
for Memphis, New Orleans, and other points south, and were worth about
$20,000.

Captain Rogers immediately took possession of the telegraph office. The
post-office was next visited, and a large amount of rebel correspondence
secured. Five companies of infantry, and a battery of Smith’s Light
Artillery, Lieutenant Willard, were sent under Major Philips down the
railroad about seven miles without meeting any of the rebel troops.
Pillow was reported to be advancing, and a large bridge and trestle work
were burnt to prevent him from reaching Paducah and falling upon the
place by surprise.

A rumor became current that a large force of rebels from Tennessee were
on their way down the Tennessee river in steamboats. To ascertain the
facts, and to intercept their progress, the gunboat Conestoga was
dispatched up the river some thirteen miles to watch the rebel
movements, and to capture suspicious vessels. Although no hostile forces
were seen, a steamer was discovered on Friday, which, on seeing the
Conestoga, turned about, was run ashore, and the officers and crew
abandoned her. It was the Jefferson, a small stern-wheel boat, loaded
with a cargo of tobacco. On Saturday the Conestoga captured a fine
propeller, called the John Gault, and a boat called the Pocahontas,
belonging to John Bell, of Tennessee. The prizes were all safely taken
to Cairo.

The inhabitants of Paducah were now seized with panic, and large numbers
left the town, apprehending an attack from Pillow, in which case they
expected the gunboats would freely use shell. On Saturday part of
Colonel Oglesby’s Eighth regiment, the Forty-first Illinois, and the
American Zouave regiment, from Cape Girandeau, entered the town,
increasing the forces to about 5,000 men.


          THE REBEL TROOPS ORDERED TO WITHDRAW FROM KENTUCKY.

On the 9th of September a dispatch from General Polk to Governor
Magoffin was laid before the Legislature, the substance of which was
that he had occupied Columbus and Hickman, on account of reliable
information that the Federal forces were about to possess those points;
that he considered the safety of Western Tennessee and of the rebel army
in the vicinity of Hickman and Columbus demanded their occupation, and
that, as a corroboration of that information, the Federal troops had
been drawn up in line on the river opposite to Columbus prior to its
occupation by them, causing many of the citizens of Columbus to flee
from their homes for fear of the entrance of the Federal troops. General
Polk proposed substantially that the Federal and rebel forces should be
simultaneously withdrawn from Kentucky, and to enter into recognizances
and stipulations to respect the neutrality of the State.

But it was well known that the cry of neutrality was only an invention
of the enemy to work his plans in Kentucky, so that when the appointed
time should come Kentucky would swarm with rebels from Tennessee and
Virginia; and two days afterwards both branches of the Legislature, by a
vote of 71 to 26, adopted a resolution directing the Governor to issue a
proclamation ordering the rebel troops then encamped in the State to
evacuate Kentucky. A counter-resolution, ordering both Federal and rebel
troops to leave the soil, was negatived under the rules of order.
Governor Magoffin accordingly issued a proclamation to the effect that
“the government of the Confederate States, the State of Tennessee, and
all others concerned, are hereby informed that Kentucky expects the
Confederate or Tennessee troops to be withdrawn from her soil
unconditionally.”


        ATTEMPT TO FORM A REVOLUTIONARY GOVERNMENT IN THE STATE.

After this decisive action of the Legislature, which effectually
destroyed the hopes entertained by the conspirators of obtaining a
semblance of legal authority for their designs, their next expedient was
to hold an informal meeting at Russelville, a small town in the southern
portion of the State, on the 29th of October. Here they drew up a
declaration of grievances, in which they charged the majority of the
Legislature with having betrayed their solemn trust, by inviting into
the State the “armies of Lincoln,” with having abdicated the government
in favor of a military despotism, and thrown upon the people and the
State the horrors and ravages of war. They recommended the immediate
arming of a “Guard” in each county, of not less than one hundred men, to
be paid as Confederate troops, subject to the orders of the “Commanding
General.” Finally, they called for a Convention to be held at
Russelville, on the 18th of November, to be “elected, or appointed in
any manner possible,” by the people of the several counties, for the
purpose of “severing forever our connection with the Federal
Government.”

John C. Breckinridge, late Vice President of the United States, was
appointed one of the commissioners to carry out the orders of the
convention. This Convention met at the time designated, composed of
about two hundred persons, professing to represent sixty-five counties,
though self-appointed, and without any form of election. On the 20th of
November they adopted a “Declaration of Independence, and an Ordinance
of Secession,” and appointed a “Provisional Government, consisting of a
Governor, and a Legislative Council of Ten,” and dispatched H. C.
Burnett, W. E. Simms, and William Preston, as commissioners to the
Confederate States. On the 9th of December, the “Congress’” of the
Confederate States, in session at Richmond, passed an “Act for the
admission of the State of Kentucky into the Confederate States of
America,” as a member “on equal footing with the other States of the
Confederacy.”

George W. Johnson, of Scott county, who was chosen as Provisional
Governor, by the Convention, in his “Message,” declared his willingness
to resign “whenever the regularly elected Governor [Magoffin] should
escape from his virtual imprisonment at Frankfort.”

Governor Magoffin, in a letter, dated December 13, 1861, says of this
Convention, “I condemn its action in unqualified terms. Situated as it
was, and without authority from the people, it cannot be justified by
similar revolutionary acts in other States, by minorities to overthrow
the State Governments. My position is, and has been, and will continue
to be, to abide by the will of the majority of the people of the State,
to stand by the Constitution and laws of the State of Kentucky, as
expounded by the Supreme Court of the State, and by the Constitution and
laws of the United States, as expounded by the Supreme Court of the
United States. To this position I shall cling in this trying hour as the
last hope of society and of constitutional liberty.”


             MILITARY MOVEMENTS OF THE REBELS IN KENTUCKY.

While Pillow and Polk were invading the south-western part of the State,
General Zollicoffer was operating in the east. With some six thousand
rebels he came to Cumberland Ford—which is situated near the point where
the corner of Virginia runs into Kentucky—capturing a company of Home
Guards. On the 17th of September the Legislature received a message from
Governor Magoffin communicating a telegraphic dispatch from General
Zollicoffer, announcing that the safety of Tennessee demanded the
occupation of Cumberland and the three long mountains in Kentucky, and
that he had occupied them, and should retain his position until the
Federal forces were withdrawn and the Federal camp broken up.

That portion of Kentucky lying west of the Cumberland river was then
declared under insurrectionary control, and Secretary Chase instructed
the Surveyor at Cairo to prevent all commercial intercourse with that
section, and to search all baggage and all persons going thither. Just
about the same time the gunboat Conestoga captured the rebel steamers
Stephenson and Gazelle, on the Cumberland, and one of them was found to
contain one hundred tons of iron.


            DECISIVE MEASURES OF THE LOYAL STATE GOVERNMENT.

When the seditious plans of General Buckner became too plain for
concealment, the Legislature found it necessary to depose him from the
command of the State troops, and General Thomas L. Crittenden, a loyal
citizen, was appointed to fill that position. Governor Magoffin, in
obedience to the resolutions and the enactments of the Legislature,
promptly issued a proclamation, authorizing that officer to execute the
purposes contemplated by the resolutions of the Legislature in reference
to the expulsion of the invaders, and General Crittenden ordered the
military to muster forthwith into service. Hamilton Pope,
Brigadier-General of the Home Guard (Union), called on the people of
each ward in Louisville to meet and organize into companies for the
protection of the city.

Great excitement existed at this time in Louisville. The Union Home
Guards began to assemble, while other Union forces were arriving and
being sent to different portions of the State. At nine o’clock on the
morning of the 18th, when the Government troops reached Rolling Fork,
five miles north of Muldragh’s Hill, they found that the bridge over the
fork had been burned by rebels under General Buckner, who were then upon
the hill.

The Legislature passed, over the veto of the Governor, a resolution to
the effect that, as the rebels had invaded Kentucky and insolently
dictated the terms upon which they would retire, General Robert
Anderson, the hero of Fort Sumter, one of Kentucky’s sons, should be
invited to take instant charge of that department, and that the Governor
must call out a sufficient force to expel the invaders from her soil.
General Anderson, who had been previously appointed by the Government to
command in Kentucky, responded to the call, and on the 21st of September
issued a proclamation calling upon the people of Kentucky to rally to
the support of the Union.

General S. B. Buckner, who had previously acted under neutrality
pretences, now gradually assumed an attitude of hostility, and in
September was openly arrayed against the Government. On the 12th he
issued an inflammatory proclamation to the people of Kentucky, in which
he declared that he sought to make no war upon the Union, but only
against the tyranny and despotism of the Federal Government, which was
about to make the people of Kentucky slaves. By such means as these he
aimed to arouse the freemen of that State to arms and to rebellion. The
proclamation was dated at Russelville, while he was entrenching a
position at Bowling Green, about thirty miles from the Tennessee line,
on the Louisville and Nashville railroad.

Very soon the Government formed a new department, consisting of Ohio,
Indiana, and that part of Kentucky within a commanding distance of
Cincinnati, placing it under the charge of General Mitchell, in order to
relieve General Rosecranz in Western Virginia and General Anderson of a
part of their responsibility, and enable them to give greater attention
to their own specific departments. The department under General Anderson
seemed to require similar military discipline to that of Annapolis and
Maryland, and, as a commencement, Martin W. Barr, the telegraphic news
reporter of the Southern Associated Press, the medium for the
transmission of correspondence from traitors at the North to rebels in
the South, was arrested, together with ex-Governor Morehead and Reuben
T. Murrett, one of the proprietors of the _Courier_, a rebel sheet.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES FOOTE. GOLDSBOROUGH. FARRAGUT. STRINGHAM.
PORTER.]

The State had now become a portion of the ground which was to be so
fiercely contested. Rebel journals and leaders made no concealment of
their purpose to wrest Kentucky from the Union at every hazard. The Ohio
river was to be the boundary of the Southern empire, and notwithstanding
the emphatic voice of her people, all the energy of the combined forces
of the rebel armies were to be brought to bear upon the work. The fact
could be no longer disguised from the people, and the loyal men, finding
that their patience and confidence in the disloyal portion, with their
previous consent to a negative position of neutrality, were in vain,
boldly declared that the time had come to arouse and resist the
impending ruin. The attempt of the conspirators of the Cotton States to
make Kentucky the battle-field, along with Virginia, was to be defeated
at every cost, and the people, rising to a comprehension of their
responsibility, hastened to the work of organization and defence.

Among the loyal men of the State to whom the highest honor is due for
their bold and stirring advocacy of the Union, and for the most summary
measures which patriotism and honor could dictate, were Hon. JOSEPH
HOLT, and Hon. LOVELL S. ROUSSEAU, of the State Senate, and the gifted
divine, R. J. Breckinridge, D.D.




                           NAVAL OPERATIONS.


At the commencement of hostilities the Government was unprepared to meet
the naval requirements incident to the contest which had so suddenly
been forced upon it. The necessity of a stringent blockade of the entire
southern coast had become apparent; while the protection and supply of
the naval stations in the rebel States still in possession of our
forces, and the recapture of those which had been seized, required a
navy vastly greater than that at the command of the Government; and no
time was lost in preparing as far as practicable to meet this emergency.

Long before the attack on Fort Sumter, the enemy had given evidence of a
determination forcibly to destroy their relations with the Government by
seizing the revenue cutters belonging to the United States stationed in
the harbors of Charleston, Pensacola and New Orleans, contemporaneously
with their appropriation of the forts, arsenals, marine depots and other
property belonging to the Government within the limits of the disloyal
States.

Immediately upon the opening of hostilities, and to give the pretence of
law and authority to the proceedings now determined on, Jefferson Davis,
on the 17th of April, 1861, by proclamation, invited men of every class,
without regard to nationality, to become privateers under letters of
marque, to be issued by the Confederate Government.

A “reward” of twenty dollars was offered by the Confederate Congress for
every life taken by these privateers in conflict with a Federal vessel,
and twenty-five dollars for each prisoner. In view of the extensive
commerce of the United States, the large number of vessels sailing to
all parts of the world, and the supposed inefficiency of our navy,
confident expectations were entertained by the rebels of a rich harvest
of wealth from this source, as well as of the destruction of our
commerce. The hope was also indulged that many vessels would be secretly
fitted out in northern ports to engage in this enterprise. This hope
soon proved to be futile; while the want of proper vessels for the
service in their own ports, and the scarcity of able seamen, and, more
potent than either, the rigorous blockade that was soon established,
presented insurmountable obstacles to their plans. The English
Government, by the Queen’s proclamation of June 1, decided that
privateers should not take prizes to any of her ports; and France and
Spain also declared that such vessels should remain but twenty-four
hours within their harbors, and prohibited either confiscation or sale
during such stay.

The first offensive act of the war on the part of our navy was the
attack on Sewall’s Point battery, in Virginia, on May 18, 1861. This
battery, then not completed, was situated at the mouth of Elizabeth
river, commanding also the entrance to James river. On the 18th the
United States steamer Star, two guns, and transport Freeborn, of four
guns, opened their fire and dislodged the enemy from their
entrenchments. During the night, however, the works were repaired and
occupied by a larger force. On the following day the steamer Star again
opened fire on them, and after exhausting her ammunition retired.

On the 31st of May, the United States steamers Thomas Freeborn, Anacosta
and Resolute attacked the rebel batteries at the railroad terminus at
Acquia Creek. As the tide was out, the vessels could not approach near
enough to accomplish their reduction. On the following day the fire was
renewed by the vessels, under command of Captain Ward, and returned by
the enemy with spirit from three batteries on the shore, and one on the
heights above. They were soon driven from the shore batteries, but that
on the hill was at an elevation which could not be reached by shot from
the gunboats. The vessels were struck several times, with but little
damage, and two men were wounded. The loss of the enemy was not
ascertained.

On the 6th of June, while reconnoitering on the James river, the steamer
Harriet Lane discovered a heavy battery at Pigs Point, at the mouth of
the Nansemond river, opposite Newport News. She opened fire on it to
discover its character, and finding from the response that it was too
formidable for her guns, she withdrew, having five men wounded in the
encounter.

On the 27th of June, Commander J. H. Ward of the steamer Freeborn,
accompanied by a party of men from the Pawnee, under Lieutenant Chaplin,
who were engaged in erecting a breastwork at Matthias Point, on the
Potomac, were attacked by a large force of the enemy. The men on shore
were exposed to a galling fire, but made good their retreat in their
boats, three only being wounded, taking all their arms and implements
with them. Commander Ward immediately opened fire from his vessel on the
attacking party, and drove them to cover. While sighting one of the guns
of the Freeborn, Commander Ward was struck by a rifle ball, mortally
wounded, and died within an hour.

Captain JAMES H. WARD was born in the year 1806, in the city of
Hartford, Connecticut. His early days were spent in the usual studies of
youth, and on the 4th of March, 1823, he entered the United States
service, sailing as midshipman, under Commodore McDonough, in the
frigate Constitution. After serving faithfully for four years with
McDonough, he was promoted to the position of lieutenant, and was for
some time attached to the Mediterranean service. Many years of his life
were spent on the coast of Africa, and he was also in the gulf, as
commander of the United States steamer Vixen. Nearly all his naval life
was spent on the ocean. For some time he had a very responsible
professorship in the naval school at Annapolis, and later was in command
of the receiving ship North Carolina. His talents were not entirely
devoted to naval affairs, for he is well known as an author by his
works, entitled “Steam for the Million,” “Ordnance and Gunnery,” and
“Naval Tactics.” The news of his death brought sorrow to many, and his
memory is safely embalmed in the heart of an appreciating nation.




                    THE EXPEDITION TO CAPE HATTERAS

                          AUGUST 26–30, 1861.


The first naval achievement of the war which was attended with any
important result was the successful attack of the fleet under Commodore
Stringham, accompanied by General B. F. Butler, and his land forces,
upon Forts Hatteras and Clark, at Hatteras Inlet, North Carolina.

[Illustration:

  ATLANTIC COAST FROM FORTRESS MONROE TO FORT MACON.
]

The whole length of the Atlantic coast from Chesapeake Bay to Charleston
has a peculiar character. A long line of low, sandy beaches, of variable
width and elevation, rise above the surface of the ocean, broken at
occasional intervals by a passage, ordinarily of shallow depth of water,
communicating from the open sea with the lagoons inside. These bodies of
water, by the indentations of the main land and the mouths of the
rivers, expand into large bays, of which Pamlico and Albemarle Sounds
are the principal. These two form capacious highways of safe and easy
communication along the coast, and through the Dismal Swamp Canal
connect with the Chesapeake Bay, on the north, at Norfolk, Va.

At the south-western extremity of the long, narrow island or beach, the
outer angle of which has received the name of Cape Hatteras, and which
gives its name to the inlet, the rebels had erected two strong
fortifications known as Forts Hatteras and Clark. Captain Samuel Barron,
late of the United States navy, was here in command of the naval forces,
while Colonel William F. Martin, of the Seventh North Carolina
Volunteers, and Major W. S. G. Andrews, commanded the garrisons.

Hatteras Inlet was one of the principal passages through which the
vessels of the Confederacy made their way, in defiance of the blockade,
and which it was desirable to command with the Federal forces and fleet.
An expedition was accordingly planned, and the preparations were far
advanced when General Wool reached Fortress Monroe. All things having
been made ready, on the 26th of August, the fleet, under Commodore S. H.
Stringham, left Hampton Roads for its destination. It consisted of the
flag-ship Minnesota, Captain G. A. Van Brune, having in company the
United States steamers Wabash, Captain Samuel Mercer; Monticello,
Commander John P. Gillis; Pawnee, Commander S. C. Rowan; Harriet Lane,
Captain John Faunce; United States chartered steamers Adelaide,
Commander Henry S. Stellwagen; George Peabody, Lieutenant R. B. Lowry;
and tug Fanny, Lieutenant Pierce Crosby, all of the United States navy.
The transports Adelaide and George Peabody, towing schooners with
surf-boats on them, and the Monticello and Pawnee surf-boats only.

General Butler embarked his land forces on the two transports Adelaide
and George Peabody, having with him five hundred of the Twentieth New
York regiment, Colonel Weber; two hundred and twenty of the New York
Ninth regiment, Colonel Hawkins; one hundred of the Union Coast Guard,
Captain Nixon; and sixty of the United States Second Artillery,
Lieutenant Larned.

The expedition left Fortress Monroe on Monday, the 26th, at one o’clock,
P. M., and the last vessel had arrived at Hatteras Inlet by four o’clock
on Tuesday afternoon. Preparations for landing troops were made the same
evening, and at daylight the next morning dispositions were made for an
attack upon the forts by the fleet, and the landing of the troops.




                  CAPTURE OF FORTS HATTERAS AND CLARK.


At four o’clock on Wednesday morning, all hands were called, and by
five, the whole fleet was in a state of the greatest activity with
preparations for the conflict. The Monticello, the Pawnee, and the
Harriet Lane were sent to cover and assist generally in landing the
troops, and they took up a position about two miles and a half north of
the forts. The Cumberland was taken in tow by the Wabash. The iron and
flat boats were meanwhile filling with troops from the steamers, and one
hundred marines who had been taken from the war vessels to increase the
land forces. The Wabash went up to the battery first, drawing the
Cumberland after her. The Minnesota followed, and as they drew near the
point, the two batteries and the barracks of the rebels were plainly
visible. In the sound, beyond the narrow neck of land, several
vessels—three steamers, some schooners under sail, and a brig laying at
anchor under the guns of the forts—were clearly seen.

Colonel Max Weber, of the Twentieth New York, was appointed to command
the land expedition, and about ten o’clock the boats left the transports
with the first detachments of the storming forces. They consisted of
forty-five men of the New York Twentieth, Captain Larner and Lieutenant
Loder; forty-five marines from the Minnesota; sixty-eight men, New York
Ninth regiment, Captain Jardine; one hundred and two men of Twentieth
New York; twenty-eight men Union Coast Guard, Captain Nixon; and twenty
marines, making a total of three hundred and eighteen men.

A heavy surf was breaking on the beach at the time, and the landing was
dangerous. The landing was handsomely covered by the Monticello and
Harriet Lane. Compelled to wade through the water to the shore from the
boats, the men were wet by the surf, and were obliged to march with
their ammunition in no better condition than themselves.

The challenge from the Wabash, at a few minutes before ten o’clock, was
soon responded to from Fort Clark, the smaller of the two, and for
several hours the firing was maintained on both sides with great spirit.
The shot from the forts fell short of the vessels, two or three only
striking the Monticello, but without doing any damage. After getting the
range of the forts from the various vessels of the fleet, the shells
that were hurled into the enemy’s strongholds were directed with great
precision, and almost uniformly reached the points at which they were
aimed.

Three hours of cannonading from fifty-seven heavy guns produced a marked
effect on the smaller fort, and by half-past one o’clock it became
evident that the enemy were becoming discouraged, their firing having
been almost abandoned. At this time, the flags of both forts were hauled
down, the troops already landed were seen hurrying with their colors
towards Fort Clark, and boats laden with men were trying to escape in
the sound. General Butler telegraphed from the Harriet Lane a request
for the fleet to cease firing, and the proper signal was made, but
apparently not fully understood. About thirty of the Federal troops were
by this time in and around Fort Clark, and had already raised the Union
flag. They were fired upon by the Pawnee and Monticello, under the
impression that it was a ruse, and several shells burst in their
immediate vicinity. The two vessels were signaled to return, when the
latter reported that the inner battery was still in the hands of the
enemy; but on again reconnoitering, reported that it was an error.

But the victory was not yet won. The Monticello entered the inlet, and
when within six hundred yards of the lower battery, was fired upon, and
the real state of affairs became apparent. The gunboat responded, and
for fifteen minutes a fire was kept up, which seemed likely to sink the
vessel. All hands were called to quarters, and the Federal vessels
prepared to resume the attack, the troops having in the mean time
withdrawn from Fort Clark to a safer location.

Darkness was gathering thickly around, and the weather became
threatening. The order to “cease firing” was reluctantly given, and the
fleet withdrew, the Monticello, Pawnee and Lane remaining as near the
shore as possible, in order to protect the landed troops, while the
larger vessels anchored in the offing.

Early the next morning, all hands were again called. The smaller vessels
had been driven ashore during the night by the gale, and the little band
of troops were left to protect themselves, as best they might. The
smaller steamers were sent in shore to be in readiness to cover the land
forces, and to aid in any attempt that might be made to land the
remainder. At about eight o’clock, the Wabash and Susquehanna proceeded
to take up a position—this time at anchor. Twenty minutes later, the
Susquehanna opened fire, followed immediately by the Wabash, and soon
the Minnesota found an anchorage ground, and the action commenced in
earnest. An hour later, the Cumberland took position near, and did good
execution, as did also the Harriet Lane, with her rifled guns.

Thus for an hour a rapid fire had been kept up, but without eliciting
any reply from the fort, or without any flag having been shown. Thirty
minutes later, their batteries replied, having been mostly aimed at the
Cumberland, and the fight continued for half an hour, without
intermission, when a white flag was shown from the large fort. Again the
order to cease firing was given, the sailors flew to the rigging, and
from ship to ship rang the cheers of victory. General Butler sent
Lieutenant Crosby ashore to inquire the meaning of the white flag. He
soon returned, bringing Mr. Weigel, with a communication from Commodore
Barron, offering to surrender, with all the arms and ammunition, the
officers to go out with side arms, and the men to retire without arms.
General Butler demanded a full capitulation as prisoners of war, which
was subsequently complied with.

In three-quarters of an hour Lieutenant Crosby returned with Commodore
Barron, Major Andrews and Colonel Martin. With these officers General
Butler went aboard the flag-ship Minnesota, to make the agreement with
Commodore Stringham, on the part of the navy. The articles were signed,
and the forts surrendered and occupied by the Union forces. While the
terms were under consideration, the Adelaide and Harriet Lane both got
aground, and occasioned some fear lest the enemy, taking advantage of
this circumstance, might renew the contest. But happily their fears were
not realized. In reaching the Minnesota, Commodore Barron was obliged to
pass under the guns of the Wabash, the vessel which he had himself
commanded a few months before, and which he had just been endeavoring to
destroy from his batteries.

The result of this expedition was the capture of seven hundred and
fifteen men, including the officers, one thousand stand of arms,
seventy-five kegs of powder, five stand of colors, thirty-one pieces of
cannon, including a ten-inch columbiad, a brig loaded with cotton, a
sloop loaded with provisions and stores, two light-boats, one hundred
and fifty bags of coffee and smaller stores.

The prisoners were transferred to the Minnesota, and taken to New York.
Their acknowledged loss was forty-nine killed and fifty-one wounded. On
the Federal side, not a single life was lost, and only two or three
wounded.




                           WESTERN VIRGINIA.


A series of active events in Western Virginia now claim our attention.

Governor Wise, on hearing of the death of General Garnett, and the
defeat and dispersion of his army, commenced a retreat up the Kanawha,
cautiously followed by General Cox. He intended to make a stand at
Gauley’s Bridge, at the junction of Gauley and Kanawha rivers, and had
erected defences for that purpose; but in consequence of the
demoralization and desertion of his men, and learning that General
Rosecranz had dispatched a large force to intercept him, he fled without
fighting, on the 28th of July, destroying the bridge to cut off his
pursuers. He left behind him a thousand muskets, and a quantity of
powder, which were seized by General Cox. Early in the month of August,
General Floyd was reinforced by fresh troops from the eastern section of
the State, while Jackson was also advancing with a new army to attack
the position of Rosecranz at the Cheat Mountain Pass, and General
Loring, another rebel commander, was marching towards Huttonsville to
act in conjunction with Jackson’s forces.




                        SURPRISE AT CROSS LANES.


On the morning of the 26th of August, the Seventh Ohio regiment, Colonel
Tyler, attached to General Cox’s brigade, had just encamped at a
position in the mountains called Cross Lanes, near Summersville, about
twenty-four miles from Gauley Bridge, and eighteen from Twenty-mile
Creek, where the main body of General Cox’s forces were.

While at breakfast they were surrounded and attacked in front and on
both flanks simultaneously, by a rebel force of three thousand infantry,
four hundred cavalry, and ten guns. Colonel Tyler’s men were immediately
formed for battle, and fought bravely, though in an almost hopeless
position. The enemy proving too powerful, the Colonel dispatched an
orderly to the baggage train, which was coming up, but three miles
distant, and turned it back towards General Cox’s camp, where it arrived
in safety. The regiment met the advancing foe with desperate valor, and
finally succeeded in cutting their way through the superior force by
whom they were encompassed, Lieutenant-Colonel Creighton capturing the
enemy’s colors and two prisoners in their progress. The ranks were much
broken, and companies B, C and I suffered severely. The line was soon
formed again, and prepared for a renewal of the attack, but they were
permitted to make good their retreat without further molestation.
Captains Dyer, Shurtleff and Sterling, Adjutant De Forrest, Lieutenant
Narrent, and Sergeant-Major King were killed. The total loss is reported
at fifteen killed, forty wounded, and thirty prisoners. The loss of the
enemy is not known, but could not have been less.




                       BATTLE OF CARNIFEX FERRY.

                          SEPTEMBER 10, 1861.


More than a month had now elapsed since General Rosecranz had been
entrusted with the Federal command in Western Virginia, and the
commanders of the hostile forces had been intently watching the
movements of the opposing armies, anxious for an opportunity to strike a
decisive blow.

From his headquarters at Clarksburg, General Rosecranz moved forward to
resume active operations, and at two principal points the enemy prepared
to give him battle. The popular impression was that he intended to
attack General Lee, at Cheat Mountain Gap, his nearest and most
accessible opponent, then held in check by General Reynolds. Floyd had
been permitted to cross the mountains at Summersville, and was known to
be then in the Kanawha region, some eighty or a hundred miles distant,
where it was the intention of the Federal commander to seek him. It was
not until Monday, the 9th of September, that the General reached Birch
river, where he concentrated his force, drawn from various encampments,
and which had marched in detached bodies to the rendezvous appointed.
After leaving the valley of the Big Birch the route lay through a
mountainous and densely wooded country, infested with guerrillas, who
gave them much annoyance; and as no reliable guide accompanied the army,
Rosecranz was obliged to rely chiefly upon the inhabitants for
information of the geographical and topographical features of the
country. The position of Floyd’s forces was also unknown to him, and it
was not until he had reached Cross Lanes, eight miles from Summersville,
that he received reliable information that the enemy was strongly posted
somewhere in the range of hills that line either side of the Gauley
river, immediately facing that village. Floyd was known to be advised of
the approach of the Federal army, as his scouts and skirmishers had been
encountered frequently on the previous day, and it was the plan of
Rosecranz to carefully reconnoitre the position of the enemy before
advancing any considerable force within range of his guns; but the eager
and importunate requests of various officers, as well as the impetuosity
of the men, urged him forward.

Colonel McCook was first sent with a squadron of Chicago cavalry to
Carnifex ferry, by a road which led through ravines to the Gauley river.
In an attempt to destroy a boat found here he was fired upon by the
enemy, who were out of range of the carbines of the cavalry. To overcome
this opposition, he dispatched a man asking that _ten_ infantry should
be sent to his aid. By some mistake the whole of Colonel Lytle’s Tenth
Ohio, an Irish regiment, came hurrying down, eager for a fight, and
opened fire on the woods on the opposite side that speedily banished the
enemy. Colonel Lytle’s regiment continued in the advance, acting as
skirmishers, and shortly drove in a detachment of the rebels from an
exposed camp on the left, of the road. This road was very narrow, and
shut in to the very wagon tracks with the jungle of underbrush.

General Rosecranz, who was still ignorant of the precise position of the
enemy, or of the nature of his entrenchments, now sent orders to General
Benham that Lytle should proceed down this road to make a
reconnoissance, to be supported, if necessary, by the remainder of
Benham’s brigade. Lytle was still a mile in advance of the rest of the
brigade, pushing cautiously forward, with companies A, B, C and E, as
skirmishers. They suddenly found themselves in front of some kind of
fortification, and the enemy discovered them at the same time. At first
there was sharp and scattered firing, when suddenly a terrific crash of
musketry was followed by a storm of bullets. The enemy had opened along
his whole front. The remainder of the Tenth was hurried forward to
support the advance, and General Benham sent orders for the Thirteenth,
Colonel Smith, and the Twelfth, Colonel Lowe, to come forward. The
Federal troops stood their ground with the greatest heroism, in the face
of a heavy battery. The firing on either side was not effective; and
though the Tenth suffered severely, the loss was not great.

The Thirteenth, Colonel Smith, came in on the left, a little in the rear
of the Tenth, and deploying towards Floyd’s right, opened in fine style.
In the thickest of the firing, Colonel Lytle dashed forward in front of
the enemy’s works, leading several companies, and as they left the cover
of the woods, he received a severe wound. The ball which disabled him
also wounded his horse, who dashed his rider to the ground, and in his
death agony plunged over the parapet into the enemy’s works. Colonel
Lytle was carried to a house near by, and lay in great pain, within
hearing of the contest he was unable to share. The Tenth, discouraged
and embarrassed by the loss of their leader, became somewhat scattered
in the woods, but held their position and kept up a steady fire.

Meantime, Colonel Lowe came up with the Twelfth, and was led by
Adjutant-General Hartsuff into the woods near the spot where the Tenth
first received the enemy’s fire. He was leading up his regiment, waving
his sword to cheer on his men, when he was struck in the forehead by a
musket ball, and fell heavily from his horse. He died bravely, a
soldier’s death, in front of the foe, and in the presence of his men.

The reconnoissance that was designed, had now grown into a severe and
general engagement. But the unknown position of the enemy, and the
necessity of calling up other regiments to support the advance, had led
to a premature struggle. McMullen’s howitzer battery, and Captain
Snyder’s battery were brought forward as speedily as possible, and
rendered efficient service. General Rosecranz dispatched
Adjutant-General Hartsuff to order up Colonel McCook’s brigade, who
rushed forward in a state of wild enthusiasm when they were informed
that they would have the honor of storming the batteries. Meantime the
General, who had been making a careful survey of the whole field, found
that the work would be too hazardous, and cost too many valuable lives,
if it were then attempted, and countermanded the order. It was now too
dark to distinguish the foe, and it became absolutely necessary to
withdraw the troops.

The men had marched seventeen miles and a half, and many of them were
exhausted with scouting and skirmishing all day over the hills. They
retired slowly, galled with disappointment, and bivouacked, wearied and
supperless, within musket range of the rebel front. Sentinels were
posted to prevent any attempt of the enemy to surprise them, and guard
against the retreat of Floyd if possible. But total ignorance of the
country, and the intense darkness of the night, made it impossible to
secure all the avenues of retreat. General Rosecranz himself was up all
night long, taking care of his position with jealous and anxious
solicitude; but notwithstanding, the foe slipped from his grasp.

The troops expected to storm the position and take it by sunrise, but
before that time it was discovered vacant. Floyd began the evacuation as
soon as he ascertained that Rosecranz did not intend to storm him, and
by three o’clock the next morning the enemy put the deep and turbulent
Gauley, and some miles of rugged road, between himself and the disgusted
Federal army—sinking the flats and destroying the trestle bridge by
which he had secured his retreat.

The Union troops immediately took possession of Floyd’s camp, in which
he had left his own personal baggage, that of his officers, and their
parade stores, the baggage and blankets of private soldiers, large
numbers of muskets, squirrel guns, powder, lead, cartridges, forage,
large quantities of commissary stores, and some horses and wagons.

He took nothing with him, in fact, excepting his guns, part of his
tents, and a small supply of rations. It was also ascertained that he
threw at least a portion of his cannon into the Gauley.

The loss of Rosecranz’s army in the engagement was 16 killed, and 102
wounded. That of the enemy was probably small, as they were well
protected from the Federal fire. Twelve rebel prisoners were taken, and
25 of Colonel Tyler’s Seventh Ohio, mostly wounded, who had been
captured at Cross Lanes on the 26th of August, were released.




                     BATTLE OF CHEAT MOUNTAIN PASS.


On the 12th of September, General Reynolds, commanding the Federal
brigade on Cheat Mountain, was attacked by General Lee of the Secession
army, with a force computed at 9,000 men. The Cheat Mountain Pass lies
between the valley of the South branch of the Potomac river and those of
Elk and Gauley rivers, tributaries of the Great Kanawha.

The first position held by General Reynolds was at the foot of the
mountain, but subsequently two fortifications had been erected on the
summit of two adjacent spurs, seven miles apart by a bridle path, which
were called Cheat Summit and Elk Water. General Reynolds’s headquarters
was at Elk Water, while Colonel Kimball of the Fourteenth Indiana, held
a subordinate command at Cheat Summit.

The enemy was well informed of the position and strength of these
defences, but had no desire to attack General Reynolds in either of his
strongholds. Their leader had hopes, however, of escaping the vigilance
of the Federal commanders by making a detour and marching on beyond, and
was engaged in this enterprise when he met with unexpected reverses.

The two Federal posts were in constant communication by a telegraphic
line, and pickets guarded every avenue of approach.

On the 12th, the enemy, five thousand strong, with eight pieces of
artillery, under command of General R. E. Lee, advanced on this position
by the Huntersville Pike. Our advanced pickets—portions of the Fifteenth
Indiana and Sixth Ohio—gradually fell back to our main picket station;
two companies of the Seventeenth Indiana, under Colonel Hascall,
checking the enemy’s advance at the Point Mountain Turnpike, and then
falling back on the regiment which occupied a very advanced position on
our right front, and which was now ordered in. The enemy threw into the
woods on our left front three regiments, who made their way to the right
and rear of Cheat Mountain, took a position on the road leading to
Huttonville, broke the telegraph wire, and cut off our communication
with Colonel Kimball’s Fourteenth Indiana Cavalry on Cheat Summit.

At the same time an equal force of the enemy advanced by the Staunton
Pike on the front of Cheat Mountain, and threw two regiments to the
right and rear of the mountain, thus uniting with his other column. They
advanced towards the pass, in order to get to the rear of Elkwater, when
three companies of the Thirteenth Indiana, and one from the Fourteenth,
met them. The encounter resulted in the rout and retreat of the enemy.

A large portion of the rebel troops were now closing in on Cheat
Mountain, when detachments of the Fourteenth Indiana, and Twenty-fourth
and Twenty-fifth Ohio, numbering in all about three hundred, held them
in check. Affairs rested in this condition till dark. Determined to
force a communication between the detached portions of his command,
General Reynolds ordered the Thirteenth Indiana, under Colonel Sullivan,
to cut their way, if necessary, by the mail road, and the greater part
of the Third Ohio and Second Virginia, under Colonels Manon and Moss,
respectively, to do the same by the path; the two commands starting at
three o’clock, A. M. on the 13th, the former from Cheat Mountain Pass,
and the latter from Elk Water, so as to fall upon the enemy
simultaneously, if possible. Early on the 13th, the small force of about
three hundred from the summit, engaged the enemy with such effect, that
notwithstanding his great superiority in numbers, he retired in great
disorder, leaving large quantities of clothing and equipments on the
ground. The relieving forces failing to encounter the enemy, marched to
the summit, secured the provision train, and reopened the communication.
While these events were proceeding on the mountain, General Lee advanced
on Elk Water, apparently for a final attack. A rifled Parrot gun from
Loomis’ battery was run to the front about three-quarters of a mile, and
after a few shots, which told with fine effect on their ranks, they
retreated to a place beyond its range. On the 14th, the enemy was again
in position in front of Elk Water, but were repulsed by the gallant
Fifteenth Indiana, who held their ground and fired with the most telling
effect. The enemy also made an effort to reach the pass, but they were
again repulsed, and withdrew to a point some ten miles distant. On the
15th, the rebels appeared again in much stronger force than before, and
attempted a flank movement by the left, but they were driven back and
compelled to retire from the field by the vigilant and heroic garrison
on the summit.

One hundred of the enemy were killed and wounded, and about twenty were
taken prisoners. The Federal forces lost nine killed, and about sixty
prisoners. Lieutenant Junod, of the Fourteenth Indiana, was among the
killed, and Captain James Bense, and Lieutenants Gillman and Shaffer, of
the Ohio Sixth, and Lieutenant Merrill, of the Engineers wounded.

One of the most important incidents of this engagement was the death of
Colonel John A. Washington, of the rebel army, aid-de-camp to General
Lee.




                      ENGAGEMENT AT CHAPMANSVILLE.


A brilliant affair took place at Chapmansville, Logan county, Virginia,
on the 25th of September, when a body of the enemy under Colonel Davis,
numbering about five hundred, was defeated and driven from behind their
breastworks by five hundred and fifty men of the Thirty-fourth Ohio,
under Colonel Piatt.

The want of men in Western Virginia had induced the Government to call
this regiment into the field before its ranks were full, and they had
been on duty but one week when the affair at Chapmansville took place.
With only six hours notice they marched from Cincinnati, and on the 19th
of September arrived at “Camp Enyard,” on the Kanawha, occupied by
Colonel Enyard with three hundred of the First Kentucky and two hundred
of the Home Guards of Virginia.

Three days subsequently they learned that the enemy were in force fifty
miles distant, and marched, in company with Colonel Enyard’s command to
Peytona, where they separated, Colonel Piatt proceeding to Boone
Court-house. A march of about sixteen miles the next day brought them in
contact with the advance cavalry guard of the enemy, who were quickly
driven in. The force was immediately made ready for battle, and
proceeded on for two hours, constantly skirmishing with the retreating
foe. Though unable to ascertain the position or force of their opposers,
they yet marched bravely, with Colonel Piatt in advance, until the dim
outline of a breastwork became visible through the dense underbrush,
situated on the slope of a hill between two mountain ridges on the right
and a small ravine on the left. The brush had been cut down on the right
and a force of the enemy, comprising about one hundred men, were
stationed there to rake the advancing troops, and their fire was poured
in incessantly. The Federals returned the fire and advanced fearlessly,
in four columns, with company A, Captain Rathbone, deployed to the
right, directly up the side of the mountain, for the purpose of
outflanking the enemy on the left; company C, Captain Miller, dispatched
for a similar purpose to the left; company I, Captain Anderson, marching
up the ravine, and the centre moving directly up the road. When within
about twenty yards of the breastworks they were suddenly fired upon from
all quarters. The order from Colonel Piatt to storm the entrenchments
was responded to with hearty cheers, and the men dashed on, regardless
of the storm of bullets that tore up the earth around them.

Captain Anderson was the first to mount the breastworks, his men
following steadily and with unflinching courage. Captain Miller on the
left, and Captain Rathbone on the right, were impeded by obstructions,
but quickly overcoming or dashing through them, joined in the charge. A
few minutes sufficed to reach the inside and break the ranks of the
enemy, who fled to the mountains. They left twenty-nine dead behind and
had fifty wounded, among them Colonel Davis, of North Carolina, who
afterwards died. The Federal loss was four killed and eight wounded.

Colonel Piatt marched into Chapmansville, the former headquarters of the
enemy, encamped for the night, and then returned to Camp Enyard, almost
without provisions, and forced to wade through swollen streams and
surmount rugged mountains.




            RECONNOISSANCE AT GREEN BRIER, WESTERN VIRGINIA.

                            OCTOBER 3, 1861.


General Reynolds, commander of the Federal forces on Cheat Mountain
Summit, who had so successfully resisted the attempt of the enemy to
flank his position on the 12th of September, having learned that General
Jackson had a fortified camp on the Green Brier river, at a point where
the Staunton turnpike ascends the Alleghany mountains, about twelve
miles distant, determined on a reconnoissance in force, and if possible
a surprise of the enemy’s encampment. On the night of October 2, at
twelve o’clock, he started from his encampment, with the Twenty-fourth,
Twenty-fifth and Thirty-second Ohio, and the Seventh, Ninth, Thirteenth,
Fourteenth, Fifteenth and Seventeenth Indiana regiments, with Howe’s,
Loomis’ and Daum’s batteries, thirteen pieces, and a small force of
cavalry, in all about five thousand men.

About daylight they came in contact with the enemy’s outposts, at the
first Green Brier bridge, which resulted in their being driven within
the entrenchments with considerable loss by the Twenty-fourth Ohio and
Seventh Indiana.

The rebel camp was located on a steep elevation, known as Buffalo Hill,
their entrenchments rising one above another along its terraced sides.
Howe’s and Loomis’ batteries were soon put in position, and were
effective in silencing a number of the enemy’s pieces, which had opened
on the advancing Federal columns. The infantry were impatient for the
order to advance to the assault, while for thirty-five minutes every gun
of the assaulting batteries were actively engaged.

One after another of the rebel pieces were dismounted, until only one
remained, which replied with spirit, while the lower entrenchments were
almost wholly evacuated by their defenders. Rockets were thrown up from
the enemy’s camp at this time, which the General supposed was a signal
for reinforcements from another encampment known to exist a few miles
distant. It was not long before the surmise was verified. Down the
mountains in the rear of the camp came a column of men, estimated at two
thousand, bringing with them several pieces of artillery of a superior
character. They were received with loud cheers by their hitherto
faltering comrades. The fresh pieces were soon mounted on the upper
works, and took part in the engagement.

[Illustration:

  SIEGE OF LEXINGTON, MO., SEPT. 12–20, 1861.
]

In the mean time the infantry Colonels were clamorous for permission to
storm the upper works, but the General opposed this as unnecessarily
involving a great sacrifice of life, which would not be justified for
the possession of an unimportant position. A flank movement was
permitted, however, to gain a more accurate knowledge of the enemy’s
entrenchments and force, in which most of the regiments participated.
The men were brought under a cross-fire of shell and canister, and the
General discovered the works could not be carried without great exposure
and loss. As the artillery had nearly exhausted their ammunition, he
deemed it prudent to withdraw his force, which was done without any
molestation from the enemy.

The entire Federal loss was but eight killed and thirty-two wounded,
while that of the enemy was about double this number, principally in the
skirmish outside of their entrenchments. Thirteen of the rebels were
captured.




                    DEFENCE OF LEXINGTON, MISSOURI.

                         SEPTEMBER 12–20, 1861.


One of the most exciting events of the war in the West was the defence
of Lexington, Missouri, by Federal troops, commanded by Colonel James B.
Mulligan, consisting of the Chicago Irish Brigade, eight hundred strong,
four hundred Home Guards, and a part of the Missouri Eighth, under
Colonel White; the Missouri Thirteenth, six hundred and fifty men,
Colonel Peabody; Illinois First Cavalry, four hundred men, Colonel
Marshall. In addition to these, Captain Graham, Lieutenant-Colonel
White, Lieutenant-Colonel Given, and Major Wright had also small
commands—in all, 2,780 men.

Lexington is the capital of Lafayette county, and contains a population
of about five thousand. It is on the right bank of the Missouri river,
one hundred and twenty miles west of Jefferson City, and three hundred
miles from St. Louis. The heights on which the town is built command the
river, and to a considerable extent the back country. Old Lexington, an
earlier settlement, is situated east of the new town, back of the river,
on the hills, where the main body of Price’s army was posted, while the
attack was made from different points. Colonel Mulligan’s fortifications
were between the two towns, and consisted of heavy earthworks, ten feet
in height, with a ditch eight feet in width.

On the 1st of September, Colonel Mulligan, whose regiment was then
encamped at Jefferson City, received orders to march to the relief of
Lexington, then threatened by the enemy, and in six hours the regiment
was on its way, and in nine days after entered the town, which they
found occupied by Colonel Marshall’s cavalry, and a body of Home Guards.
On the 10th a letter was received from Colonel Peabody, saying that he
was retreating from Warrensburg, twenty-five miles distant, and that
Price was pursuing him with ten thousand men. A few hours after, Colonel
Peabody, with the Thirteenth Missouri, entered Lexington.

On the 12th, as the enemy drew near the city, two companies of the
Thirteenth Missouri were ordered out as skirmishers, who recognized
General Price (by the aid of glasses), leading on the advance guard of
his men. Company I of the Irish Brigade held them in check until Captain
Dillon’s company of the Thirteenth Missouri drove them back.
Subsequently six companies of the Missouri Thirteenth and two companies
of the Illinois cavalry were dispatched in search of the retreating
enemy.

They engaged them in a cornfield, fought with them gallantly, and
harassed them to such an extent as to delay their progress, in order to
give time for constructing intrenchments around the camp on College
Hill. This had the desired effect, and the Federals succeeded in
throwing up earthworks three or four feet in height. This consumed the
night, and was continued during the next day, the outposts still
opposing the enemy, and keeping them back as far as possible. At three
o’clock in the afternoon of the 14th the engagement opened with
artillery. A volley of grapeshot was thrown among the officers, who
stood in front of the breastworks. The guns within the entrenchments
immediately replied with a vigor which converted the scene into one of
the wildest excitement. At seven o’clock the enemy withdrew and the
engagement ceased for the night.

Next morning General Parsons sent in a flag of truce, asking permission
to bury his dead. The request was cheerfully granted, and the Federal
troops willingly assisted in burying the fallen foe. On Tuesday the work
of throwing up intrenchments went on. It rained all day, and the men
stood knee-deep in the mud, building them. Troops were sent out to
forage on the three succeeding days, and returned with large quantities
of provisions and fodder.

All this time the pickets were constantly engaged with the enemy, well
aware that ten thousand men were threatening them, and knowing that the
struggle was to be a desperate one. Earthworks had been reared
breast-high, enclosing an area of fifteen to eighteen acres, and
surrounded by a ditch. Outside of this was a circle of twenty-one mines,
and still further down were pits to embarrass the progress of the enemy.
During the night of the 17th they were getting ready for the defence,
and heard the sounds of preparation in the camp of the enemy for the
attack on the morrow. At nine o’clock on the morning of the 18th, the
drums beat to arms, and the terrible struggle commenced. The enemy’s
force had increased to twenty thousand men and thirteen pieces of
artillery. They came as one dark moving mass of armed men, as far as the
eye could reach. Two batteries were planted by them in front, one on the
left, one on the right, and one in the rear, and opened with a terrible
fire, which was answered with the utmost bravery and determination. The
batteries opened at nine o’clock, and never ceased to pour deadly shot
upon the garrison. About noon the hospital was taken. It was situated on
the left, outside of the intrenchments. They besieged it, took it, and
from the balcony and roof their sharpshooters poured a deadly fire upon
the Federal troops. The hospital contained the chaplain and one hundred
and twenty wounded men. But it could not be allowed to remain the
possession of the enemy. The Montgomery Guard, Captain Gleason, of the
Irish Brigade, was brought out, and the word to “charge” given. They
stormed up the slope to the hospital, took it, and drove the enemy in
wild confusion down the hill. The fire of the rebels was for the time
lessened, only to be increased towards evening, and word was sent that
if the Federal troops did not surrender before the next morning, the
black flag would be hoisted and no quarter given.

The next morning the fire was resumed and continued all day. A fierce
bayonet charge was made by the garrison, that served to show the enemy
that the Union troops were not yet worn out. All that day the soldiers
in that little band stood straining their eyes and searching the
distance in hopes that some friendly flag might be coming to their
assistance. But no welcome flag came in sight, and with the energy of
despair they determined to do their duty at all hazards. It was
intensely hot—the lips of the men were parched and blistering. They were
without water, and yet no word of murmuring was heard. That night two
wells were dug. The morning of the next day, the 20th, dawned sadly upon
them, and still the battle raged furiously. The rebels had constructed
moveable breastworks of hemp bales, rolled them up the hill, and
advanced their batteries so as to command the fortifications. Heated
shot were fired at them but without avail, they having been thoroughly
water-soaked. The outer breastworks were soon carried by a charge from
the enemy, the Federal lines broken, and the rebels rushed in. At point
after point they were repulsed, but the cartridges of the Union troops
had given out, and it was evident that the struggle could not be
protracted. Of a sudden the firing ceased, and it was subsequently
ascertained that the Home Guards had hoisted a white flag. It was taken
down, but again raised by the same hands from the centre of the
fortifications—when the fire of the enemy slackened and ceased. Under
this state of affairs, Colonel Mulligan, calling his officers into
council, decided to capitulate, and Captain McDermott went out to the
enemy’s lines, with a handkerchief tied to a ramrod, and a parley took
place. Major Moore, of the brigade, was sent to General Price’s
headquarters, at New Lexington, to know the terms of capitulation. These
were soon made known; the officers to be retained as prisoners of war,
the men to be allowed to parole, with their personal property,
surrendering their arms and accoutrements.

Reluctantly this was acceded to, and the surrender took place. At four
P. M. on Saturday, the Federal forces, having laid down their arms, were
marched out of the intrenchments to the tune of “Dixie,” played by the
rebel bands. They left behind them their arms and accoutrements,
reserving only their clothing. Many of the men wept on leaving their
colors behind, as each company in the brigade had its own standard
presented by its friends. At the surrender, the muster-rolls of the
companies were taken to General Price’s headquarters, the list of
officers made out, and they ordered to report themselves as prisoners of
war.

The scenes at the capitulation were extraordinary. Colonel Mulligan shed
tears. The men threw themselves upon the ground, raved and stormed; well
nigh frenzied, demanding to be led out again and “finish the thing.” In
Colonel Marshall’s Cavalry regiment, the feeling was equally intense.
Much havoc had already been done among their horses during the siege,
and but little more than half of them remained. Numbers of the privates
actually shot their own horses dead on the spot, unwilling that their
companions in the campaign should now fall into the enemy’s hands.

The privates, numbering some one thousand five hundred strong, were
first compelled to take the oath not to serve against the Confederate
States, when they were put across the river, and in charge of General
Rains marched on Saturday night to Richmond, sixteen miles, whence on
Sunday they marched to Hamilton, a station on the Hannibal and St.
Joseph railroad, where they were declared free to go where they pleased.

No reliable statement of the casualties at the siege of Lexington seems
to have been published. Of the irregular army of General Price, large
numbers of whom were not enrolled, but were outside volunteers, many
were killed and buried on the spot, no record being made of their loss.
One hundred and forty Federals were left in the hospital, many of whom
were suffering from sickness, and not from wounds. Colonel Mulligan lost
probably two hundred in killed and wounded, while the rebel loss could
not have been less, and according to some estimates must have reached
three or four times that number. General Price’s force was estimated at
numbers varying from twenty to thirty thousand, the lowest being
probably nearest the actual number, with twenty-one pieces of artillery.

General Price, in his official report to Governor Jackson, inventoried
his acquisitions as follow:—“Three thousand five hundred prisoners,
including the colonels, and one hundred and eighteen commissioned
officers, five pieces of artillery and two mortars, over three thousand
stand of infantry arms, a large number of sabres, about seven hundred
and fifty horses, many sets of cavalry equipments, wagons, teams,
ammunition, more than a hundred thousand dollars’ worth of commissary
stores, and a large amount of other property.”

[Illustration: Geo. B. McClellan]

For daring and patient suffering—fighting day after day without water,
the battle of Lexington stands almost without a rival in history. It was
stubbornly contested, and evinced in the most striking manner the
devotion and faithfulness of the adopted citizens of our country.




                      ATTACK ON SANTA ROSA ISLAND.

                            OCTOBER 9, 1861.


Santa Rosa Island is a long, narrow strip of low land, partially covered
with bushes and stunted trees, lying opposite Escambia and Santa Rosa
counties, on the western coast of Florida. The Bay of Pensacola is
separated from the Gulf of Mexico by this island, which varies in width
from one hundred yards to five-eighths of a mile. At the western
extremity of the island Fort Pickens stands, commanding the channel, and
on the mainland, a short distance west of the Navy Yard, is Fort San
Carlos de Barrancas.

General Bragg, commanding at Pensacola, had matured a well-devised plan
by which he designed to surprise and capture Fort Pickens, but in which
he was signally defeated by the watchfulness and bravery of the troops
at the fort, and on the island. The Federal force encamped on the island
was a part of the New York Sixth Volunteers, known as Wilson’s Zouaves,
numbering about three hundred men; and the destruction or capture of
this force, was the first design of the leaders of the expedition, who
confidently hoped, in the confusion arising from a night attack and
rout, to obtain possession or destroy the batteries on the island, if
not to capture Fort Pickens itself.

On the morning of Wednesday, the 9th of October, at two o’clock, the
enemy silently commenced their advance upon the camp from a point about
four miles distant, where they had landed during the night, about
fifteen hundred strong, under General Anderson. The night was extremely
dark, and it was almost impossible to distinguish any object at a
distance of twenty yards. The Zouaves, numbering about three hundred,
were encamped a mile from the fort, on the shore, but between the fort
and the approaching foe, with their pickets thrown out a mile in
advance. About three o’clock, the rebels, having driven in the pickets,
who made a gallant resistance, reached the camp of Colonel Wilson, and
owing to the confusion and darkness, before he had time to form his men,
they were driven from their tents, many of which were burnt or destroyed
by the enemy.

On the first alarm, Colonel Harvey Brown, commandant of the fort,
dispatched Major Vogdes, with two companies of regulars, to the scene of
conflict. The men soon became intermingled with the enemy, who succeeded
in taking the Major prisoner. Major Arnold, with two additional
companies, was soon after sent out from the fort, and favored by the
light of the burning tents, they were enabled to ascertain the position
and force of the enemy, and gallantly rushed to the attack. Captain
Hildt, now in command of the two companies which had been led on by
Major Vogdes, extricated his men from their perilous position, and
opened a well-directed fire on the enemy, compelling them reluctantly to
give way. Colonel Wilson, who had succeeded in bringing a body of his
men together after their sudden surprise, formed them into line, and now
joined in the battle, when the insurgents were very soon thrown into
confusion, and made a rapid retreat to their boats, pursued by a
victorious force of only one-fourth their number.

Colonel Brown, in his report, says that “the plan of the enemy’s attack
was judicious; and, if executed with ordinary ability, might have been
attended with serious loss to the Unionists. But he failed in all save
the burning of one-half of the tents of the Sixth regiment, which, being
covered with bushes, were very combustible, and in rifling the trunks of
the officers. He did not reach within five hundred yards of either of
the batteries, the guns of which he was to spike; nor within a mile of
the fort he was to enter with the fugitives retreating before his
victorious arms!”

Many of the rebels were wounded by the sharp firing continued by the
Federal troops during their re-embarkation. One of their flatboats sunk,
and many bodies were found floating in the water on the following day.
The Federal loss was fifteen killed, forty-one wounded, and eighteen
prisoners; that of the rebels in killed and wounded was over one
hundred, and thirty-five of them remained prisoners in the hands of the
Federal forces.




                        BATTLE OF BALL’S BLUFF.

                           OCTOBER 21, 1861.


Perhaps no event in the course of the war thus far produced a more
profound sensation than the news of the Battle of Ball’s Bluff, which
occurred on the 21st of October. The loss of life was heavy on the part
of the Federals. Several accomplished and valuable officers were killed,
among whom was the distinguished and eloquent Senator from Oregon,
General Baker. The fatality attending this battle caused it to be
regarded with peculiar interest, and remembered as fruitful in daring
deeds and memorials of terrible bloodshed.

The north and south banks of the Potomac river, from the Great Falls, a
few miles above Washington, to Harper’s Ferry, were held by the Federal
and secession troops respectively. Great care was taken by the
Government to defend the north bank, in order to prevent the threatened
incursion of the enemy into Maryland, from whence, aided by the disunion
sympathizers of that State, they designed to make the long contemplated
attack upon the capital. Among the troops stationed on the Potomac,
extending from Great Falls to Edwards Ferry, was the division of General
Banks; from Edwards Ferry to Conrad’s Ferry, a division under General
Stone; while Colonels Lander, Geary, and others held the line thence to
Harper’s Ferry.

On the south side of the river, two strong positions were held by the
enemy—Dranesville and Leesburg. The latter is the terminus of the Loudon
and Hampshire railroad, about five miles from the Potomac, and opposite
Edwards Ferry. The Southern commanders having determined to abandon
their design of crossing the Potomac, had commenced the withdrawal of
their troops from various points towards Manassas.

General McClellan, anxious to ascertain whether any movement of the
forces at Leesburg and Dranesville had been made, directed General
McCall, on the 18th, to push a reconnoissance in force in the direction
of Dranesville. General McCall penetrated to that town, found that the
enemy had evacuated the place, and was informed that Leesburg had also
been abandoned.

While this reconnoissance was progressing, General McClellan informed
General Stone of the fact, and directed him to make careful observations
of the movements of the enemy, to ascertain what effect was produced by
the expedition of General McCall. He also suggested that a slight
demonstration on his own part might be successful in expediting their
removal.

In obedience to these orders, General Stone, on the 20th, made a feint
of crossing the river at Edwards Ferry, while four companies of the
Fifteenth Massachusetts were sent to Harrison’s Island, in the Potomac,
situated between Edwards and Conrad’s Ferries. At ten o’clock, P. M.,
Lieutenant Howe, Quartermaster of the Fifteenth Massachusetts, reported
that Lieutenant Philbrick had returned to the island from his
reconnoissance to Leesburg, and that he had been within one mile of that
place, discovering only a small encampment of thirty tents, and without
encountering any of the enemy—no pickets being out at any distance from
their camp.

The Federal forces in that vicinity were then posted as follows:—General
Stone, with General Gorman’s brigade, Seventh Michigan, two troops of
Van Alen cavalry, and the Putnam Rangers, at Edwards Ferry; five
companies of Massachusetts Volunteers, under Colonel Devens, at
Harrison’s Island; and Colonel Lee, with a battalion of the
Massachusetts Twentieth, a section of the Rhode Island battery, and the
Tammany regiment, were sent to Conrad’s Ferry. A section of Bunting’s
New York battery was planted at Edwards and a section of Rickett’s
battery at Conrad’s Ferry.

When the report of the scouts was received, orders were sent to Colonel
Devens to march four companies to the Virginia shore, from Harrison’s
Island, and under cover of the night, take up a position near the camp
referred to, and attack it at daybreak, drive out the enemy, pursue them
as far as prudent, and return to the island. Orders were also sent to
Colonel Baker, to march the First California regiment to Conrad’s Ferry,
to arrive there at sunrise, and to have the remainder of his brigade
ready to move at an early hour.

Lieutenant-Colonel Wood, of the Fifteenth Massachusetts, was also
ordered to move with a battalion to the river bank opposite Harrison’s
Island by daybreak. Two mounted howitzers in charge of Lieutenant
Trench, of Rickett’s battery, were ordered to the tow-path of the canal
opposite Harrison’s Island.

This disposition of the troops having been made for the commencement of
the movement, it was necessary to provide the means for their
transportation across the river, which is quite rapid at this point.
Edwards Ferry is below the island, which is about three miles in length,
and Conrad’s Ferry is a short distance beyond the upper end. The island
lies about a third of the distance from the Virginia shore, while a
swift current of three hundred yards separates it from the Maryland
banks, traversed by a tow-path of the Chesapeake and Ohio canal. The
Virginia bank opposite the island is steep, and is backed by a
precipitous bluff, varying in height from eighty to one hundred and
fifty feet, covered with brush, trees and undergrowth.

There was no adequate preparation to effect the passage of troops at
these points. The means were scanty either for reinforcement, or for
retreat, if that should become necessary. On the Maryland side of
Harrison’s Island were two scows, capable of carrying thirty persons
each, which could make two trips hourly, thus conveying one hundred and
twenty men. On the Virginia side was one scow and a small boat. At
Edwards Ferry there were two scows and a ship’s yawl. With these
insufficient means of transportation an attempt was made to land the
forces on the opposite shore.

The landings at both of the ferries are good, but stretching almost the
entire distance between them is the high and steep bank known as Ball’s
Bluff, where the crossing was attempted, and which has given its name to
this bloody struggle.

Passing along and up the steep and difficult way from the landing below
the bluff until it turns at the top, the road enters an open field of
some six acres, surrounded on all sides by a forest. In this field the
battle took place, the rebel forces being posted in the woods.

At daybreak, four companies of the Massachusetts Fifteenth, under
Colonel Devens, had reached the opposite shore, and after reconnoitering
had formed their line on Ball’s Bluff, on the edge of the cornfield.
While in this position they were attacked by a considerable body of the
enemy, with whom an irregular skirmish was kept up. Colonel Baker had
during the morning been transferred from Conrad’s Ferry to Harrison’s
Island, and appointed to the command. About noon the reinforcements
began to come up, consisting of three companies of the Massachusetts
Twentieth, six hundred of the California regiment, two companies of the
Tammany regiment, with two howitzers and one rifled gun, in charge of
Lieutenant Bramhall of the New York Ninth.

In the mean time the rebels, well informed of the difficulties of the
Federal position, and only awaiting the arrival of a larger number that
they might add to the magnitude of the victory which was within their
grasp at any moment, having engaged the Federals by a series of
irregular skirmishes during the earlier part of the day, concentrated
their forces on General Baker’s command at half-past two o’clock. With a
force of three thousand men they commenced a vigorous attack from the
woods on three sides of the Federal position. A portion of Colonel
Gorman’s command at Edwards Ferry crossed over, but from want of means
of transportation could not make either their numbers or presence of
effective service.

The real battle, however, commenced on the left. Baker threw the whole
responsibility of that wing upon Wistar. The latter did not like the
appearance of the adjacent wood region, and threw forward companies A
and D of his battalion to test them. Captains Markoe and Wade, the
former well ahead, accordingly advanced on their hazardous duty; passed
through the forest to the horn-like projection of the field, crossed it,
and had arrived within ten paces of the further thicket, when a
murderous fire blazed out upon them.

The poor fellows gallantly sprang through it upon their assailants, and
were in a moment fighting in the woods. Not half of this noble band ever
came back. The rebels, taking this as a signal for the commencement of
the action, now bestirred themselves in force, and fired a terrific
volley along their whole front. Only the sheeted flash showed itself
from those frowning forests; the foe still clung to cover; but the hail
of bullets rattled against the Union lines, and many brave souls were
sent into eternity by that first fiery revelation of the enemy’s
strength. The reply was instant and extended. In a second both ends of
the field were clouded with smoke, the day’s skirmishing was over, and
the contest that was to rage so hotly for an hour had commenced its
fury.

The battle on the part of the Federals was fought heroically, and in a
true sacrificial spirit. The enemy was in force in front; he began to
creep down the treacherous sides of the enclosure; his sharpshooters
climbed the trees everywhere, picking out the stateliest and most
gallant forms for the death they so unerringly dealt. The lines thus
received a scathing fire from the front, from above, and a cross-fire at
angles right and left. All they could do in reply was to aim steadily
and swiftly at the places whence the loudest yells and deadliest volleys
proceeded. But the men dropped everywhere, and were borne by dozens to
the gory skiffs below. On the right the Massachusetts men were more than
decimated by the regular, unavoidable shower of bullets. But against the
left, where Wistar commanded, the rebels, confident of their force and
the effect of their deadly fire in front, began to make venturesome
charges, each one repelled by the gallant fire of the Californians, but
each one getting nearer the Federal lines than the last. On the fourth
charge they actually flanked the left, and sprang forth, savage and
eager, from the thicket beyond the ravine. Down this they were about to
plunge. “Hold!” cried Wistar to his men; “not a man of you must fire;”
and he dashed at the piece of one; “wait till they reach the bottom of
the ravine; then we’ll have them.”

So they charged down the hill, only to meet the most effective volley
fired on the Union side during that day. When the smoke rose their front
ranks lay fallen in the hollow of the valley of death, and the rear had
broken and fled in disorder through the forest.

Lieutenant Bramhall had posted his gun near the centre of the line, and
opened fire to the best advantage possible. When he mounted the piece,
he had eight artillerists, three riders, a corporal and sergeant. In ten
minutes, five of these were shot down; in the end, all but two were
killed, wounded or missing. Lieutenant Bramhall himself was severely
wounded, but stood by his gun. Colonel Coggswell saw the necessity of
the case, informed Colonels Wistar and Lee, Adjutant Harvey (of Baker’s
brigade), and Stewart (of General Stone’s staff, present on the field);
and those five distinguished officers and determined men manned the
piece themselves. Coggswell and Harvey, understanding the business,
would load, while Lee and Wistar were giving orders to their commands,
and spurring them into the fight; then Wistar and Stewart would wheel
the gun forward to position; Coggswell would take aim and give the word
to Harvey, who held the percussion lanyard. In this way and by these men
a dozen of the twenty rounds used were fired, doing more effect than all
the musketry volleys. When the enemy was making his fifth charge on the
left, the cannon had just been loaded and was pointed at the woods in
front. Captain Beiral, of the Californians, who was with his company
supporting the piece, exclaimed to Coggswell,

“Look to the left! look to the left!”

Coggswell saw the dark column of the rebels sweeping across the spur of
the field, wheeled the terrible gun around, and discharged it square at
their centre. The shell opened a lane through the charging force, a
score or more falling never to fight again, and the column retreated
upon the main body behind.

But the end was fast approaching. The thinning Union forces were
assailed by four times their number. From every side death stormed
upon their unsheltered bodies. Half their line officers were wounded
or killed. The undaunted leaders were also falling. Ward,
Lieutenant-Colonel of the Fifteenth, had received a frightful wound;
Coggswell was shot through the wrist; Lee, Devens, Harvey and Stewart
were still fighting sadly and in vain; a ball shattered Wistar’s sword
arm—he dropped the weapon, picked it up with his left hand, and
General Baker himself restored it to the scabbard. The shouting enemy
began to break from the wood and through the smoke upon the confused
lines. The crisis had come. There was some hand-to-hand fighting; a
few of the gray-coats got entangled with the Federal forces, who took
a prisoner and passed him to the rear; the enemy took a dozen, and
made charge after charge. Just then a body of men appeared, pressing
down from the left. The General ordered the troops around him to stand
firm, and cried, “Who are those men?” “Confederate troops!” was the
reply; and they rushed almost within bayonet distance. One of them
drew a revolver, came close to Baker, and fired four balls at the
General, every one of which took effect, and a glorious soul fled
through their ghastly openings. Captain Beiral seized the slayer by
the throat, and blew out his brains—the hero and the traitor falling
within the same minute, and face to face. In a second the enemy
swarmed over the spot. “For God’s sake, boys,” cried Adjutant Harvey,
in his hot English way, “are you going to let them have the General’s
body!”

An angry howl was the answer, and a dozen charged, with set teeth and
bayonets fixed, upon the rebels, who recoiled from the shock, and
surrendered their priceless trophy. The body of this thrice heroic man
was passed down the bluff, and safely conveyed to the island. But now
the Union lines were hopelessly disordered. The rebels came through both
the field and woods in final force. Coggswell saw that the day was lost,
and that the desperate, impossible retreat had come. So he ordered his
scattered men to retire for embarkation, and the field was given up to
the foe.

Large numbers of the Union troops had anticipated the order to retreat;
for an hour the shore had been lined with stragglers and wearied men.
Still, the reinforcing business had not ceased from the island, and
during the fiercest of the action the two boats, which were bringing
away the dead and wounded, returned from each trip laden with the
residue of the Tammany and Massachusetts regiments. The life-boat proved
a death-boat, for it swamped, from some cause, while conveying to the
battle-field the last of the Tammany companies.

[Illustration:

  DEATH OF COLONEL BAKER.
]

Down the hill they came, in every direction and without order, hotly
followed by the rebels to the very edge of the descent. Then the
pursuers paused, too cautious to meet the chance of volleys from
Harrison’s Island, but throwing a plunging fire upon the retiring
loyalists, and aiming ruthlessly at the hundreds trying to swim the
rapid river channel. The tumult and agony of that headlong descent, the
clamor and crowd along the shore, the rush into one wretched skiff,
already over-laden with wounded men, which forced it beneath the surface
and brought the horror of death by water upon men who had already so
fairly faced the battle-field are beyond description. Who can depict the
wild struggle with those turbid waters, and the desperate calmness with
which each wretched soldier went down at last? Who can tell of those
who, struck down by the fire from above, slipped in their own blood upon
the clayey river bank; of those who wasted too feeble strength in
swimming half way across the cruel stream; of the shouts for help where
no help came. A few, more fiercely courageous than the rest, dragged the
cannon to the edge of the hill and plunged them over, thus rendering
them useless to the enemy. The colonels who had fought so steadily still
refused to surrender, but guarded the retreat, so far as desperate
courage could do it, to the end. Led by Coggswell and Lee, several
organized companies charged up at their tormentors, once and again
returning dangerous volleys. They kept the enemy at bay till long after
nightfall closed upon the scene. All who could pass over to the island
had escaped, and midnight was close upon them before the two colonels
and the other field officers still on the shore saw that their duty was
accomplished, and surrendered themselves and the remnant of their
commands to the enemy.

A most painful scene transpired at the sinking of the launch, in which
were some sixty wounded men, and twenty or thirty members of the
California First. The launch had been safely taken half way across the
river, when, to their utter consternation, it was discovered that it was
leaking, and the water gradually, but surely, gaining upon them. The
wounded were lying at the bottom, suffering intolerably from their
various dislocations, wounds and injuries, and all soaking in water,
which at the very start was fully four inches deep. As the water grew
deeper and rose above the prostrate forms of the wounded, their comrades
lifted them into sitting postures that they might not be strangled by
the fast rising stream. But the groans and cries, screams and moanings
of the poor fellows who were thus tortured, were most distressing and
indescribable. Despite all that could be done, the fate of the launch,
and all that were in it, with the exception of a few expert swimmers,
was sealed; suddenly, and like a flash of lightning, the fragile craft
sunk, carrying with it at least fifty dying sufferers, and some twenty
or thirty others, who had trusted their lives to its treacherous hold.

The very skies were pitiless that evening. O the misery of the black,
tempestuous night, when the rain poured down upon that narrow island
where those who escaped the flood and field were bivouacked, huddled
together and bereft of their comrades-in-arms! Scores of the dead were
guarded by sullen watchers; the wounded were tended in every possible
shelter. The river swelled in a kind of savage triumph over the havoc it
had made, its current darkling and murmuring on the east and west, while
on the opposite shore lay their dead comrades, whose white faces the
rain beat in merciless fury, but all unfelt, and far more harmless than
it fell upon the living victims.

Next morning boat loads of dead and wounded were brought from the
battle-field under a flag of truce; and a dispatch had been published in
Washington stating that General Stone had successfully thrown his force
across the Potomac, and held his position secure against any hostile
force.

The statistics of this conflict show that the total number of Federal
troops that crossed the Virginia channel was about 1,853 officers and
men. Of these 653 belonged to the Massachusetts Fifteenth, 340 to the
Massachusetts Twentieth, about 360 to the Tammany regiment, and 570 to
the first battalion of the First California. The Massachusetts Fifteenth
lost in killed, wounded, and missing 322, including a lieutenant-colonel
(wounded), and 14 out of 28 line officers who crossed. The Massachusetts
Twentieth lost in all 159, including a colonel, major, surgeon, and
adjutant (prisoners), and 8 out of 17 line officers who crossed. The
Tammany companies lost 163, including a colonel, and 7 out of 12 line
officers who crossed. The Californians lost 300, including their colonel
(the general commanding), lieutenant-colonel (wounded), adjutant, and 15
line officers out of 17 who crossed. Total engaged in the fight, 1,853;
total losses, 953; field officers crossing, 11; returning uninjured, 3;
line officers crossing, 74; returning uninjured, 30.

The troops that were successful in reaching Harrison’s Island remained
there during the night of the 21st, and on the morning of the 22d were
all passed over in safety to the Maryland shore, no attempt being made
by the rebels to interfere with the movement. The condition of many of
the men was pitiful. Some of them in their encounters with the enemy,
and in struggling through the trees and thorny undergrowth, or plunging
down the rocky steep, having been almost stripped of clothing. In a
short time they were encamped in comfortable quarters, and the wounded
were provided for with the greatest care.

Large bodies of rebel troops had been brought up to Leesburg after the
battle, to defend that point, and to make an offensive movement, if
deemed expedient. About four thousand Federals, under the command of
General Stone, occupied the Virginia shore immediately opposite Edwards
Ferry, and were in imminent danger of attack from the now rapidly
increasing force of rebels threatening their front. Generals McClellan
and Banks, who had repaired to Edwards Ferry, on the Maryland shore, and
were ready to furnish large reinforcements in the event of a general
engagement, watched with anxiety the rebel movements on the opposite
side of the river. Becoming convinced that the means of transportation
were entirely inadequate to properly reinforce General Stone’s command,
the commander-in-chief ordered a withdrawal of all the Federal forces to
the Maryland shore, which was safely accomplished on the night of the
23d.

Colonel E. D. Baker, whose death will make this battle-field immortal,
was born in England, early left an orphan, and emigrated to this
country. Few men have had a more eventful career, and few men have done
so much to win the admiration of the people. He was, without question,
one of the ablest speakers in the country; when he addressed public
audiences he thrilled them with the electricity of his eloquence, and
kindled them by his earnestness as a storm of fire sweeps over the
prairie. For many years, whether at the bar, in the Congress of the
nation, or before wild wood caucuses; in speaking to citizens, jurors,
statesmen or soldiers; on the slope of the Atlantic, in the valley of
the Mississippi, at the head of legions in Mexico, before the miners of
California, or upon the banks of the Columbia, he held a place with the
best men and finest orators in the land.

At the age of nineteen he was admitted to the bar in the State of
Illinois. Subsequently he twice represented that State in the lower
house of Congress. In 1846 he resigned in order to lead the Fourth
Illinois regiment to Mexico. At Cerro Gordo, after the fall of General
Shields, as senior Colonel he took command of the brigade, and fought
through the desperate battle in a manner that drew an especial
compliment from General Twiggs.

Returning home, he was, after his recovery from a severe wound received
on the Rio Grande, again elected to Congress. Later in life he was
connected with the Panama railroad; still later, in 1852, he removed
with his family to Oregon, where he was elected United States Senator.

The struggle for the Union came, and he hastened to New York, where his
fiery eloquence stirred the heart of its people. When they rushed
impetuously to arms, he warned the country of the magnitude of the
struggle, and was foremost in support of the Government. He was not,
however, a speaker only, but a worker as well. In a little time he had
gathered about him an effective regiment. Men from all States rushed to
fill up the ranks. Refusing to resign his position in the Senate and be
promoted to a Major-Generalship, he retained his simple title of
Colonel, and died with no higher rank.

He was killed at the head of his brigade, and with his life’s blood
sealed the vow he had made to see America a free and united people or
die in the struggle. Courageous, upright, earnest, indomitable spirits
like his can never be forgotten; they are the jewels of a nation, which
brighten as they pass into eternity. In his own words, the words that
from his eloquent lips rung over the grave of Broderick, let us give him
to immortality.

               “True friend and hero, hail and farewell!”




                      BATTLE AT CAMP WILD CAT, KY.

                           OCTOBER 21, 1861.


On the same day that the disastrous battle at Ball’s Bluff, Va., was
fought, and also the successful engagement of Colonel Plummer’s command
at Frederickton, Mo., a spirited fight was maintained by a small force
of Federal troops in Kentucky. They were successful in resisting the
attack of a large body of the enemy under General Zollicoffer, who had
made advances into that State from Tennessee, by the Cumberland Gap. The
engagement was unimportant when viewed in reference to the numbers
engaged, or the loss of life, but its moral effects were significant. It
was the first battle thus far that had taken place upon the soil of
Kentucky, and it was bravely fought by her own loyal sons.

To oppose the advance of the rebels, a single Kentucky regiment, under
Colonel Garrard, was stationed at Rock-castle creek, at an encampment
known by the name of “Wild Cat.” General Zollicoffer conceived the
design of cutting off this isolated regiment, and for that purpose was
moving rapidly forward with six regiments of infantry and one of
cavalry, sacking the towns of Barboursville and Loudon in his progress.
General Albin Schoepf, who commanded the Federal troops in this
district, hearing of the advance of the rebel forces, dispatched the
Thirty-third Indiana, Colonel J. Coburn, from the camp at Big Hill,
nineteen miles south of Richmond, with instructions to occupy an
eminence half a mile to the east of Camp Wild Cat, while directions were
also given to the Fourteenth Ohio to proceed to the same place; and two
regiments of Tennessee Federalists, then at Camp Dick Robinson,
forty-four miles from the scene of action, hastened to participate in
the expected fight, and marched the whole distance on the day of the
21st, arriving just after the last feint by the enemy. Colonel
Woolford’s Kentucky cavalry had also arrived, and General Schoepf and
staff reached the scene of action in the course of the day.

At eight o’clock on the morning of the 21st, before the arrival of
Colonel Coburn’s forces at the point designated, the advance of the
enemy, with wild and exultant shouts, attacked Colonel Garrard’s camp,
and anticipated an easy victory over an inferior force, much reduced by
sickness. But the brave Kentuckians met them with an undaunted front,
and poured into their ranks a deadly fire. Having been taught to despise
the little band they were now attacking, the rebels advanced again
gallantly to the assault, but the cool and determined resistance they
met with soon put them to flight, and they retired discomfited, to await
the arrival of the main body of their forces.

Meantime Colonel Coburn, with four companies of the Thirty-third
Indiana, had started at seven o’clock, to reach the hill designated. The
command consisted of Company D, Captain McCrea; Company I, Captain
Hauser; Company E, Captain Hendricks; and Company G, Captain Dille—in
all about three hundred and fifty men. Their arrival was most opportune,
as the rebel forces were on the point of seizing the same position. The
companies were immediately deployed as skirmishers. In about twenty
minutes, the rebels, who were concealed in the woods, commenced firing.
Soon after they appeared in front, half a mile to the south, and below
in the valley. They were in large numbers, and formed in line, near an
open space, and then approached the Federal force under cover of a wood
which concealed them from view, and opened fire. At this moment the
Kentucky cavalry (Colonel Garrard,) came up, and reinforced the
Thirty-third. The enemy charged, but were repulsed under a galling fire.
The front of the rebels approached within a few rods of Colonel Coburn,
with their caps on their bayonets, saying that they were “Union men,”
and were “all right;” and having thus attempted to disarm the suspicion
of the loyal troops, suddenly poured a murderous fire upon them. After
an hour of severe struggle, the enemy were compelled to retreat, leaving
part of their dead and wounded behind them.

At about the close of this attack, another detachment of the forces
under General Schoepf came upon the ground. It consisted of four
companies of the Seventeenth Ohio. Company E, Captain Fox; company C,
Captain Haines; company K, Captain Rea; and company H, Captain Whisson,
all of whom, under Major Ward, promptly formed in line ready for their
part in the contest. But the enemy had retreated only to return with an
increased force. At about two o’clock, P. M., the attack was renewed,
and at the same time, company C, Fourteenth Ohio, Captain J. W. Brown,
appeared on the field. The position was fiercely contested, the Federal
troops rendering the most gallant and effective service in the face of
the largely superior force brought against them. A few discharges of
cannon, three pieces of which were in use, aided by the well-directed
infantry fire, resulted in the total rout and dispersion of the enemy,
who again retreated, and during the night were finally removed by
General Zollicoffer. Captain Stannard’s Ohio battery earned for itself
high commendations in this contest.

The Federal loss was four killed and twenty-one wounded. We have no
record of Zollicoffer’s loss.

While the battle was raging, General Schoepf, who had just arrived, and
had tied his horse to a tree at a short distance, desired a soldier to
go and get him. The man hesitating, the General went himself, and just
as he was unfastening the reins he was greeted with a storm of bullets.
One of them passed through his boot-top, and several struck the tree to
which the horse was tied. With the most perfect coolness the General
mounted his horse, and rode off to his post, as leisurely as if he were
an unconcerned spectator of the scene.

Zollicoffer subsequently had large reinforcements, which he put into a
condition for the best possible service, and commenced fortifying the
strong positions at Cumberland Gap.




                         BATTLE AT ROMNEY, VA.

                           OCTOBER 26, 1861.


The town of Romney is located in Hampshire county, Virginia, on the
south branch of the Potomac, one hundred and ninety miles north-west
from Richmond. It had been the theatre of previous military adventures
between the loyal troops and their enemies, who were on several
occasions compelled to retire from the place, but afterwards took
advantage of the absence of the Federal forces to return.
Brigadier-General B. F. Kelley, who commanded a portion of the forces in
the encounter at Phillipi, where he was wounded, was encamped with part
of his command at New Creek. He resolved to dislodge the rebels from
Romney, and ordered his forces to unite in a march on the town on the
morning of the 26th of October. The Fourth and Eighth Ohio, and Seventh
Virginia, were in the brigade, with the addition of the Ringgold
Cavalry.

The forces, after a march along their various routes of from twenty to
twenty-five miles, united, and about half-past two o’clock in the
afternoon, encountered the outposts of the enemy at Mill Creek, five
miles from Romney. These they drove in, and advanced to the Indian Mound
Cemetery, west of the town, where the rebels made a stand, and opened
fire with a twelve-pound rifled gun, placed in a commanding position in
the cemetery, and with a mountain howitzer from the high grounds on the
east bank of the river, at a point which commanded the road for half a
mile. At the east end of the bridge the enemy had thrown up
intrenchments, from which they kept up a constant fire of musketry upon
the head of the column. They were responded to by a twelve-pounder and
two six-pounders, until in about half an hour the General understood the
position, when he gave the command to charge upon the enemy’s
entrenchments. The cavalry, led by Captains Keys and McGhee, dashed
across the river at the ford, with enthusiastic shouts, while the
infantry, under the command of Colonels Mason and De Puy,
Lieutenant-Colonel Kelley, and Major Swearingen, rushed over the bridge
to encounter the enemy at the mouth of his guns. As soon as they saw
this movement, they immediately abandoned their positions, and retreated
precipitately through the town, flying in the direction of Winchester.

General Kelley captured a considerable number of the enemy, among whom
was Colonel Angus McDonald; two hundred horses, three wagon loads of new
rifles, three cannon, a large quantity of corn, wagons, tents, and, in
fact, everything they had.

Colonel Johns, with seven hundred men of the Second Potomac Home
Brigade, under orders from General Kelley, started from North Branch
bridge early in the morning, passing through Frankfort, having been
instructed to make a diversion with his force toward Springfield to
withdraw the attention of a portion of the enemy stationed there from
General Kelley’s movements. When within a mile and a half of Springfield
the rear of his column was fired upon by the rebels, occasioning a delay
of nearly an hour. The march was then renewed through Springfield,
disclosing evidences of the retreat of the enemy on the way. On arriving
at the bridge crossing the south branch of the Potomac, they were
discovered on the opposite side of the river, when a brisk fire was
commenced. After skirmishing half an hour, Colonel Johns determined to
cross the bridge, but found that a portion of the planking had been torn
up and removed. The enemy at the same time kept up a sharp fire, killing
one, and wounding six of his men. The passage of the bridge being
impracticable, and the firing having ceased in the direction of Romney,
Colonel Johns inferred that General Kelley was in possession of the
town. His own purpose having been accomplished in producing a diversion
of the rebel forces, and the necessity of joining Kelley no longer
existing, he withdrew his command to Oldtown, in Maryland, about nine P.
M., after a march of twenty-five miles.




                      BATTLE OF FREDERICKTON, MO.

                           OCTOBER 21, 1861.


Brigadier-General U. S. Grant commanding at Cairo, Illinois, being
informed that the rebel recruits under Colonel Jeff. Thompson and
Colonel Lowe, were congregating in Madison county, Missouri, ordered
Colonel J. B. Plummer, of the Eleventh Missouri Volunteers, to proceed
to Frederickton. Colonel Plummer was in command at Cape Girardeau, and
on the 18th, the day following the receipt of the order, he marched with
about fifteen hundred men, composed of the Seventeenth and Twentieth
Illinois Volunteers, Colonels Ross and Marsh, the Eleventh Missouri,
under the immediate command of Lieutenant-Colonel Pennabaker, Lieutenant
White’s section of Taylor’s battery, and Captains Steward and Lansden’s
companies of cavalry.

On arriving at Frederickton, Colonel Plummer found that the rebels had
evacuated the town the evening before, and that Colonel Carlin, with
about three thousand Federals from Pilot Knob, had occupied the place a
few hours before him. The enemy had retired in the direction of
Greenville, and Colonel Carlin having reinforced Colonel Plummer with
the Twenty-first and Thirty-third Illinois Volunteers, under Colonels
Alexander and Hovey, six companies of the First Indiana Cavalry, Colonel
Baker, and one section of Major Schofield’s battery, under Lieutenant
Hascock, they started in pursuit. The column, thus reinforced, was put
in motion at about one o’clock, P. M., but had not proceeded more than
three-quarters of a mile when the enemy was discovered a short distance
in advance.

Colonel Ross, whose regiment was the leading one of the column,
immediately deployed it to the left into a lane, and threw forward two
companies as skirmishers, to feel the enemy, whose exact position and
strength it was difficult to determine. Colonel Plummer directed Colonel
Ross to move forward his regiment into the cornfield in support of his
skirmishers, and ordered up Lieutenant White’s section of Taylor’s
battery, which immediately opened fire, and by its effectiveness soon
caused the enemy to respond. Their artillery consisted of four pieces,
masked, upon the slope of a hill about six hundred yards distant. The
principal body of their infantry, under Colonel Lowe, was posted in the
cornfield to the left of the road. With them the Seventeenth Illinois
was soon engaged. The other regiments of the column were deployed to the
right and left of the road as they came up. Colonel Plummer then ordered
forward the Thirty-eighth Illinois from the town, which promptly came
upon the field under one of its field officers, leaving there the Eighth
Wisconsin, under Colonel Murphy, and one section of Major Schofield’s
battery in reserve—a post of honor, though one disagreeable to them, as
all were eager to participate in the engagement.

As soon as it was practicable, Major Schofield, of the First Missouri
Volunteer Light Artillery, brought upon the field two sections of his
battery under Captain Matter and Lieutenant Hascock, which were placed
in position, and did efficient service. Major Schofield rendered
valuable aid in bringing the regiments on the right of the road into
line of battle, and in directing their movements.

In the mean time the enemy were falling back before the steady advance
and deadly fire of the Seventeenth and Twentieth Illinois, and a portion
of the Eleventh Missouri. Their retreat soon became a rout, and they
fled in every direction, pursued by the Union troops.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES GRANT. WALLACE. BUELL. SIGEL. POPE.]

At this time the enemy’s infantry on the right, where Thompson commanded
in person, being in retreat, the Indiana Cavalry charged and pursued
them. Thompson, however, had rallied a portion of his troops, about half
a mile in the rear of his first position, and brought one gun into
battery on the road, supported by infantry on either side. The cavalry
charged and took the gun, being exposed at the same time to a deadly
fire from the enemy’s infantry; but as the column that had been ordered
forward to their support did not reach the point in time, the enemy were
enabled to carry the piece from the field. It was here that Major Gavitt
and Captain Highman fell.

The rout now became general, and the enemy were pursued by the Union
troops several miles, until the approach of night induced Colonel
Plummer to recall them to town. Captain Stewart, however, with his
squadron of cavalry followed them until late in the night, and brought
in several prisoners.

Jeff. Thompson had left Frederickton on the previous evening, marching
ten miles on the Greenville road, and then turning to meet Colonel
Plummer at a point where he had intended to make the attack in the
morning. On learning that the national troops had taken a different
road, he led his force back to the point near Frederickton where the
encounter took place. The rebel force was about two thousand five
hundred. Colonel Lowe, his colleague, was killed, and one hundred and
twenty-five dead were left on the field; the number of their wounded is
not definitely known. Four of their guns and eighty prisoners were
taken. The loss of the Federal army was seven killed, and sixty wounded.




           CHARGE OF FREMONT’S BODY-GUARD AT SPRINGFIELD, MO.

                           OCTOBER 25, 1861.


Subsequent to the death of General Lyon, Springfield had been made a
rebel stronghold, and General Price, when the advancing army of General
Fremont compelled him to retreat from the central part of the State, had
established his headquarters there. During the month of October,
however, being warned by approaching columns of the Federal troops, he
had commenced the withdrawal of his forces and the immense train and
supplies he had accumulated in case he should be compelled to retreat to
Arkansas.

On the 20th of October, General Sigel, who commanded the Federal
advance, was near Bolivar, and General Sturgis’ command was one day
behind. General Lane was at Osceola; Hunter’s and McKinstry’s divisions,
as well as General Ashboth, were at or near Warsaw; General Pope was
near Louisville; while General Fremont and his staff were at Pomme de
Terre river, _en route_ for Quincy.

Having obtained information from his scouts that only about three
hundred of the enemy were at Springfield, General Fremont dispatched
Major Zagonyi, with 150 of his Body-guard, and also an equal force of
Prairie Scouts under Major F. J. White, who was then attached to Sigel’s
command, to combine their forces before reaching Springfield, and attack
the rebel camp by surprise.

The distance from the camp on the Pomme de Terre river to Springfield
was fifty-one miles. The Body-guard started on Thursday, the 24th, at 8½
P. M., and reached the neighborhood of Springfield, at 3 P. M. on the
25th, having overtaken the command of Major White, dispatched from the
camp of General Sigel to take part in this enterprise. Major White, who
was suffering from severe illness, was obliged to stop for an hour or
two to rest, and when he again started to join his command, expecting to
find them in the direct road from Bolivar to Springfield, he was
captured by the rebel scouts, who had been informed of the approach of
the Federal cavalry. Zagonyi had deemed it necessary to change his plan
of attack, and to approach the rear of the rebel camp, of which fact
Major White had not been informed. The change was occasioned by
unexpectedly meeting a small body of the enemy, who thus became aware of
the designed attack.

Major Zagonyi, on approaching within about eight miles of Springfield,
came upon a small foraging party, five of whom he captured, and the
remainder returned to the city and gave the alarm. Proceeding further
on, the Major gained additional information from Union citizens and
learned that the place was held by a force at least five or six times as
large as was supposed. Notwithstanding this he resolved to press on and
examine for himself, but the farther he proceeded the more positive was
the information that the town was held by a large force.

The first that was seen of the enemy was a short distance from the town,
where the advance discovered a full regiment drawn up on selected
ground, near the road, and prepared to receive them. The ground being
unfavorable for offensive operations, Major Zagonyi resolved not to
attack them, but to cross the prairie to the westward and approach the
city by the Mount Vernon road.

This was successfully accomplished, and upon arriving within about a
mile, the citizens notified him that the enemy, two thousand strong,
were awaiting his coming a quarter of a mile distant. Major Zagonyi was
entreated not to risk his little band in the encounter; but he had not
made a forced march of fifty miles to gain possession of a town without
at least making an attempt to fulfil his instructions; and placing the
Body-guard in front, and himself leading, he gave the order to advance.

As the Major was to approach from the west, the rebels had scattered
skirmishers throughout the dense woods or chaparral on either side, who
greeted his approach with a scathing fire which emptied several saddles.
The woods and rough bushy ground to the south of the road, was also full
of their skirmishers, hidden in the branches and behind bushes and
trees. The main body of the force, however, was drawn up in the form of
a hollow square, in a large open field to the north of the road, the
infantry bordering along a high Virginia rail fence, nearly to the
brook, and also at the head of the field bordering on the woods, and the
cavalry on the other side of the field also supported by the forest.

[Illustration:

  DESPERATE CHARGE OF FREMONT’S BODY-GUARD.
]

Upon reaching the vicinity of this place, Major Zagonyi ordered an
advance at a trot, and when fairly in the woods, the pace was increased
to a gallop. When the fire opened, the two companies of the First
Missouri Cavalry, and the Irish Dragoons, composing Major White’s
battalion, countermarched to the left. Major Zagonyi’s command alone
proceeded down the road through the fire of the enemy. Upon reaching the
open field, an attempt was made to tear down the fence and charge upon
the enemy. It was soon discovered, however, that this would be
impossible without a heavy loss, and they immediately made a rush down
the road, over a brook, where, in a measure shielded from the enemy’s
fire, they levelled the rails and effected an entrance. Here, in the
midst of the briars and stubble bordering the brook, he succeeded in
forming his men, and with the Major at their head, they gallantly
charged up the hill of the open field, right into the midst of their
foes. As they charged, the command spread out fan-like, some to the
right, some to the left, and others straight up to the woods in front.

The cavalry to the right were scattered almost instantaneously; the
infantry made a somewhat firmer stand, but it was only for a moment. The
charge was so furious, so well directed, and so compact, that the rebel
ranks were quickly scattered. Under the well-directed fire of the
enemy’s sharpshooters, the little band of one hundred and sixty-two rank
and file, contending against one thousand eight hundred, necessarily
suffered severely.

Pursuing a portion of the rebels into town, the Major here assembled his
command, or such portions of it as were at hand, raised the stars and
stripes upon the court-house, detailed a guard to attend to his wounded,
and then fearful that the enemy might become cognizant of his small
force, and rally, determined to retrace his steps toward Bolivar, where
he could meet reinforcements, the more especially as they had ridden
over eighty miles and been over twenty-four hours without food.

In the mean time Major White’s command had made a detour through the
cornfield, and after making a successful charge and defeating the rebel
forces stationed there, he reached the town a little while after Zagonyi
had left, and took possession of it.

The loss of the enemy, as nearly as could be ascertained, was one
hundred and six killed, wounded not known; that of the Federals but
fifteen killed, twenty-seven wounded and ten missing.




                      THE DEPARTMENT OF MISSOURI.


The death of General Lyon and the defeat of the Federal army at Wilson’s
Creek, on the 10th of August, and the disastrous consequences—followed
on the 20th of September by the loss of Lexington and its noble band of
defenders, filled the whole land with discontent. The commanding officer
of the Department at this time was Major-General Fremont. The public,
asking for success, and confident that it could be achieved, were
impatient of the delays and heavy expenditure of money that seemed at
least to fetter the Missouri Department. From General Fremont the public
had expected the most vigorous and brilliant campaign. The difficulties
and obstacles with which a commander must contend in organizing a
military force sufficient to encounter a large army of dashing and
lawless insurgents, are not always properly understood and considered by
the public; and their expectations, no doubt, led far in advance of the
possibilities of the situation. Occupying a field which had just been
made the scene of open hostilities, and where the Governor and the
Legislature, as a body, were hostile to the General Government, the
entire work was to be done after General Fremont had entered upon it.
The difficulty of supplying reinforcements where needed, with no
reserves upon which he could draw, left no alternative to Lyon and
Mulligan but that of retreat or collision with an overpowering enemy. In
these reverses they suffered a cruel defeat, but won imperishable fame.

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS.
]

The loss of General Lyon, and the reverses to the national army,
afforded cause for great exultation to the secessionists of St. Louis
and its vicinity, and their demonstrations of hostility became so marked
that General Fremont, on the 14th of August, was compelled to resort to
the extreme measure of declaring martial law in that city. This had the
effect of restraining the rebel sympathizers in immediate proximity with
the headquarters of the Commander, but was not regarded in the State at
large. Under these circumstances General Fremont followed this
proclamation with another on the 30th of August, establishing martial
law in the State, and fixing the lines of the army of occupation as
extending from Leavenworth by way of the posts of Jefferson City, Rolla
and Ironton, to Cape Girardeau, on the Mississippi river. All persons
taken with arms in their hands were to be tried by courts-martial, and
if found guilty, shot. The property of persons taking up arms against
the United States was declared confiscated to public use, “and their
slaves, if any they have, are hereby declared free men.”

This proclamation produced a profound excitement throughout the country,
and was received by the people with varied emotions—enthusiastically
applauded by some, and bitterly condemned by others.

The President, on the 2d of September, addressed a letter to General
Fremont, recommending him to modify his proclamation. General Fremont
desired the President to make an order for the modification in his own
name, a request with which the Chief Magistrate complied, and under date
of September 11th, communicated to General Fremont, that the
proclamation in question should be made to conform to the act of
Congress of August 6th, which confiscated only property _used_ in
rebellion; and referred the question regarding slaves to the
determination of the courts, or to subsequent legislation.

While in St. Louis, General Fremont was actively engaged in the
organization of his forces, and making preparations for his approaching
campaign. To protect the city he had extensive fortifications
constructed. He also projected and ordered the building of the gunboats,
which have since rendered such signal service. The necessity of massing
a large army near Washington, after the defeat at Bull Run, compelled
the withdrawal of many regiments which had been assigned to the Missouri
Department. It was not until the 27th of September that Fremont was
prepared to enter upon an offensive campaign. Accordingly on that day he
left St. Louis, and with fifteen steamers and fifteen thousand men,
sailed up the Missouri to Jefferson City. Here he halted several days to
collect additional material necessary for his march into the interior.

On the 29th, two days after General Fremont’s departure from St. Louis,
General Price commenced the evacuation of Lexington, leaving a small
force as a guard. On the 7th of October, General Fremont left Jefferson
City, marching in the direction of Sedalia, for the purpose of attacking
the rebel commander at the earliest opportunity.

On the 16th, two hundred and twenty men of the First Missouri Scouts,
under Major F. J. White, surprised the rebel garrison at Lexington, and
recaptured the place, with the Federal sick and wounded there, together
with two pieces of cannon, a quantity of guns, pistols and other
articles which the rebels threw away in their flight. The garrison
numbered three hundred men. The victorious troops found the inhabitants
in a deplorable condition. Some portions of the town had been plundered
of everything that could be appropriated, and many persons were
suffering for the necessaries of life. It was a painful scene, and
formed one of those early pictures of the war which have since been
multiplied so fearfully in the border States.

On the 1st of November, General Fremont, then at Springfield, entered
into an arrangement with General Price, to facilitate the exchange of
prisoners, agreeing to release any who had been made prisoners “for the
mere expression of political opinions;” and providing also that “the war
in future be confined exclusively to the armies in the field.” Armed
bodies, unauthorized by the commanders, were to be disbanded, and
persons guilty of violence and lawless acts were to be subject to trial
by courts-martial. This agreement was signed by Major Henry W. Williams
and D. Robert Barclay, Esq., for General Price, and J. H. Eaton,
Assistant-Adjutant-General, for General Fremont. A proclamation,
announcing this negotiation, was accordingly published on the first of
November.

The next day, General Fremont received from the Department at
Washington, an order relieving him from his command. General David
Hunter was appointed to the Department of Missouri, temporarily as his
successor. General Fremont returned to St. Louis, and soon afterwards
reached New York city, where he awaited the orders of the Government.

The Federal army was now withdrawn from the south-western portion of the
State, and the whole of that vast field was reoccupied by the insurgent
forces, and thousands of recruits were gathered into their ranks.

On the 4th of November, the antagonist forces were commanded as
follows:—General Hunter, 5,000; General Sigel, 4,000; General Ashboth,
4,500; General McKinstry, 5,500; General Pope, 4,000; General Lane,
2,500; General Sturgis, 1,000. The rebels under General Price numbered
15,000; under General McCulloch, 7,000.

The disloyal members of the Legislature held a session at Neosho, Newton
county, in the extreme south-western portion of the State, and on the
19th of November passed an ordinance of secession, and sent their
Commissioners to the Confederate Congress at Richmond. Missouri, as
represented by them, was admitted to the Confederacy on the 27th of
November.

On the 30th of November, General Price, then at Neosho, issued a
proclamation to the people of Missouri, calling upon them in the most
earnest manner for recruits to the rebel army. He called for fifty
thousand men, who might rendezvous at headquarters with anything in the
shape of arms that they could find; and if unarmed, to enroll
themselves, and they would be supplied. He represented the hopelessness
of the cause, and the certain defeat of the rebel army unless
immediately reinforced. His appeals had some effect in promoting
sedition, and in securing enlistments, but they fell far short of the
number he demanded.

On the 1st of December, Gen. Price was at Osceola, with 18,000 men.

On the 6th of December, Independence was entered by a band of rebels,
who seized several citizens and compelled them to take an oath not to
bear arms against the Southern Confederacy.

On the 13th of the same month, Governor Jackson, at New Madrid, issued a
proclamation to the insurgent army, in which he attempted a defence of
the rebellion, and asserted that the people of Missouri were in favor of
secession. Unfortunately for the veracity or the knowledge of Governor
Jackson, wherever the people of the State were delivered from the
terrorism of the rebels and marauders, they adhered to the Union, as was
verified by the fact, that up to the 20th of January, 1862, no less than
33,882 Missourians had entered the Federal service for three years, and
6,000 had volunteered for three months.

Major-General Henry W. Halleck was now in command of the Department. He
was compelled to adopt rigorous measures in some cases in consequence of
the pertinacious conduct of the secessionists. A memorable event of the
month of January was the annual election for officers of the Mercantile
Library Association, in which loyalty and secession were antagonistic
elements. General Halleck officially announced that each officer of the
Association would be expected to take the oath of allegiance within ten
days from the date of his order, and in default thereof the officers
failing should be deemed to have resigned their offices. Any officer
refusing to take the oath of allegiance, who should exercise or attempt
to exercise the functions of his office, should be arrested and dealt
with under the laws of war.

He also ordered that all carriages bearing the enemy’s flag should be
seized and confiscated; and that women resorting to the neighborhood of
the military prison and insulting the Federal troops, or communicating
with prisoners by exhibiting and waving secession flags, should be
imprisoned. Disloyal persons who, under the military rules, were liable
to assessment for the support of loyal fugitives from their homes,
should be compelled to pay their assessment. All persons of every rank
or position, violating the laws, or interfering with their execution,
should be dealt with under strict penalties.

This energetic administration had the desired effect; and the violent
minority who were determined, at every hazard, to plunge the State into
war, were restrained, and order and peace assured and restored.




                            THE STONE FLEET.


Notwithstanding all the activity and watchfulness of the blockading
vessels off the Southern coast, many instances were exultingly heralded
by the Southern press, as well as in Europe, of the successful running
of the blockade by vessels bound both outward and inward. The logic of
these occurrences was very simple on the part of the secessionists and
their sympathizers. The frequent evasion of the blockade proved that it
was “inefficient” on the part of the Federal government, and therefore
not only to be disregarded, but officially declared by foreign
governments to be incomplete, and practically null and void. This
declaration was expected to be sufficient to warrant the free movements
of commerce, and any attempt to interfere on the part of the United
States would be a challenge for the intervention of England and France.

The repeated instances of vessels escaping rendered it an imperative
necessity for the government to adopt some measure that would, if
possible, prevent their recurrence at the principal ports of the South.
For this purpose it was determined to close several of the harbors by
placing obstructions in the channels. Most of the harbors of the
Southern coast, in consequence of the deltas, and numerous islands at
their entrances, have several channels, through which vessels of light
draft may pass, while those of the heaviest draft are confined to one
principal channel. This is the case in the approach to both Charleston
and Savannah. The obstructing of these two principal channels was
therefore assigned for the month of December.

For this purpose a number of old whaling vessels were purchased at New
Bedford and New London, freighted with granite from the Bay State, and
taken to Port Royal as a rendezvous, whence they were to be convoyed to
their destination. The people of Savannah, after the capture of Port
Royal and Beaufort, anticipating the approach of the Federal fleet,
volunteered the work on their own behalf and blockaded their own port by
similar means. The fleet was therefore at liberty to repair to
Charleston, and within sight of the walls of Sumter, to shut out the
rebellious people of that city from the ocean.

The “Stone Fleet” sailed from Port Royal on the 18th of December,
accompanied by the steamers Cahawba, Philadelphia and Ericsson, to tow
and assist, the whole convoyed by the Mohican, Captain Gordon, the
Ottawa, Captain Stevens, and Pocahontas, Captain Balch.

The fleet arrived off Charleston harbor the next day and preparations
were made for sinking them in their places. Each of the weather-beaten
and storm-tossed old vessels that had so long borne the stars and
stripes in every latitude, were now to make a stubborn protest against
treason by keeping watch at the very door of its birth-place. They were
furnished with ingenious contrivances and plugs, the withdrawal of which
would allow the water to flow in and sink them on the floor of the
channel.

The sinking of the fleet was intrusted to Captain Charles H. Davis,
formerly on the Coast Survey, and ever since more or less intimately
connected with it. It is remarkable that when, in 1851, an appropriation
was made by the Federal Government for the improvement of Charleston
harbor, and, at the request of South Carolina, a commission of army and
navy officers was appointed to superintend the work, Captain Davis was
one of the commission, and for three or four years was engaged in these
operations. The present attempt was of somewhat different character. The
entrance by the main ship channel runs from the bar to Fort Sumter, six
miles, nearly south and north. The city is three miles beyond, bearing
about N. W. The other channels are Sanford’s, Swash, the North, and
Maffit’s, or Sullivan’s Island, which need not to be particularly
described. Only the latter is practicable for vessels of any draught,
but all serve more or less to empty the waters discharged by the Ashley
and Cooper rivers. Over the bar, at the entrance of the main ship
channel, is a narrow passage, through which vessels may carry eleven
feet at low water; about seventeen at high water. The plan of Captain
Davis for closing the harbor proceeded on the following principles:

The obstructions were to be placed on both sides of the crest of the
bar, so that the same forces which created the bar might be relied on to
keep them in their places.

The bar was not to be obstructed entirely; for natural forces would soon
open a new passage, since the rivers must discharge themselves by some
outlet; but to be only partially obstructed, so that, while this channel
was ruined, no old one, like Swash or Sanford, should be improved, or a
new one formed.

The vessels were so placed that on the channel course it would be
difficult to draw a line through any part of it that would not be
intercepted by one of them. A ship, therefore, endeavoring to make her
way out or in could not, by taking the bearings of any point of
departure, as she could not sail on any straight line.

The vessels were placed checkerwise, at some distance from each other,
so as to create an artificial unevenness of the bottom, remotely
resembling Hell Gate and Holmes’s Hole, which unevenness would give rise
to eddies, counter-currents and whirlpools, adding so seriously to the
difficulties of navigation that it could only be practicable by
steamers, or with a very commanding breeze.

The execution of this plan was begun by buoying out the channel and
circumscribing within four points the space where the vessels were all
to be sunk, as follows:

                                   *
                        S. W. * THE BAR. * N. E.
                                   *

The distance between the points from S. W. to N. E. is about an eighth
of a mile; the breadth perhaps half as much. It was no part of the plan
to build a wall of ships across, but to drop them at a little distance
from each other, on the principles above stated, closing the channel to
navigation, but leaving it open to the water.

Work was resumed on Friday morning, the 20th, the Ottawa and Pocahontas
bringing the ships to their stations. The placing of them was an
operation of considerable nicety, especially as some of the vessels were
so deep as to be with difficulty dragged on the bar, except at high
water. A graver hindrance to their exact location was found in the
imperfection of the arrangement for sinking, several of the ships
remaining afloat so long after the plug was knocked out, that they swung
out of position. They were, nevertheless, finally placed very nearly
according to the plan. Great credit was earned by Mr. Bradbury and Mr.
Godfrey for the successful execution of so difficult an undertaking. The
last ship, the Archer, closed the only remaining gap, and the manner in
which Mr. Bradbury took her in with the Pocahontas and then extricated
the latter from her perilous position, filled the fleet with admiration
for his skillful seamanship and cool daring. By half-past ten the last
plug was drawn, and every ship of the sixteen was either sunk or
sinking.

One of the vessels, the Robin Hood, with upright masts, stood erect, in
water too shallow to submerge her. As evening drew near she was set on
fire, and in a little time the evening sky was lighted up with the
pyrotechnic display, while the inhabitants of Charleston, the garrison
of Fort Moultrie, and the surroundings, were compelled to look on and
see the temporary completion of the blockade they had so long derided
and defied.

This event provoked loud and vindictive complaints and assaults in
France and England, and the measure was denounced as an outrage on
civilization, and a sufficient warrant for interference in the war. But
an examination of the historical precedents afforded by British practice
closed the mouths of the declaimers in Parliament as well as through the
press, and once more American practice was permitted to pass, justified
by the verdict of opinion as well as of illustrious example.




                 BATTLE OF CAMP ALLEGHANY, W. VIRGINIA.

                           DECEMBER 13, 1861.


On Thursday morning, December 12th, Brigadier-General R. H. Milroy
started from his headquarters on Cheat Mountain Summit, with fifteen
hundred men, with the design of attacking a rebel camp on the Alleghany
mountains, twenty-five miles distant. The column started at eight
o’clock, and after a fatiguing day’s march arrived, at eight P. M., at
the old Camp Bartow, on the Greenbrier river, the scene of General
Reynolds’ rencontre on the 3d of October previous. Here the troops
rested until eleven P. M., when the General divided his force into two
columns, with the intention of reaching the enemy’s camp on the summit
of the mountain, about eight and a half miles distant, from two opposite
points, at four o’clock, A. M., of the 13th.

The first division, consisting of detachments from the Ninth Indiana,
Colonel Moody, and Second Virginia, Major Owens, about one thousand
strong, took up its march on the old Greenbank road to attack the enemy
on the left.

The second division consisted of detachments from the Thirteenth
Indiana, Twenty-fifth and Thirty-second Ohio, and Bracken Cavalry, under
Major Dobbs, Colonel J. A. Jones, Captain Hamilton and Captain Bracken.
Brigadier-General Reynolds and his staff conducted this division,
numerically about the same as the first division. This column took the
Staunton pike, and marched cautiously until they came in sight of the
enemy’s camp, where, after throwing out more skirmishers, the division
left the road and commenced to ascend the mountain to the enemy’s right.
After driving in some of the hostile pickets they reached the summit in
good order. The enemy were fully prepared to receive them. The fight on
the enemy’s right commenced about twenty minutes after daylight.

Lieutenant McDonald, of General Reynolds’ staff, with one company of the
Thirteenth Indiana, formed the line of battle, placing the Twenty-fifth
Ohio on his left, part of the Thirteenth Indiana on their left, and part
of the Thirty-second Ohio on their left. The enemy immediately advanced
to attack the Federal troops, but after a few rounds retreated in great
confusion, leaving their dead and wounded. Colonel Moody’s division not
appearing to attack the enemy on the left, the rebels seeing the
inferior force opposed to them, were again encouraged to advance toward
their assailants, which they did with a far superior force, pouring in
their fire with vigor. Some of the Federals now commenced falling to the
rear, all along the line; but Captains Charlesworth and Crowe, of the
Twenty-fifth Ohio, Lieutenant McDonald, Captains Myers and Newland, of
the Thirteenth Indiana, and Hamilton, of the Thirty-second Ohio, rallied
them, and brought them into line in a few moments. The enemy again fell
back and attempted to turn their right flank, but was immediately met
and repulsed. The fortunes of the day appeared to alternate between the
respective armies for three hours, the Federals holding out bravely
against the superior numbers of the enemy, who were enabled to
concentrate their entire army of two thousand men and four or five
pieces of artillery against this comparatively small force.

Colonel Moody’s force not having then been heard from, Colonel Jones,
who had charge of the division now in action, after exhausting his
ammunition, withdrew his men from the field.

Almost at this juncture, Colonel Moody’s command, which had been
detained by obstructions placed in the road over which they were
compelled to pass, arrived, and attacked the enemy vigorously on his
left, and in turn maintained an obstinate contest, unaided, against the
entire rebel command, which they did with much courage and skill, until
three o’clock, P. M., when they too were compelled to retire before the
superior force of their opponents.

Though thwarted in his plan of attack by the unexpected obstructions
which Colonel Moody’s division had to encounter, General Milroy was far
from being disconcerted by the result. The men had evinced a high order
of courage, and the divisions had alternately maintained an obstinate
fight against an army of nearly three times their number.

The official report of the casualties on the Federal side gives the
number of killed, twenty; wounded, one hundred and seven; missing, ten.
The rebel loss is acknowledged by the Richmond _Enquirer_ to have been
about the same.




                      BATTLE AT MUNFORDSVILLE, KY.

                           DECEMBER 17, 1861.


Colonel Willich, with the Thirty-second Indiana, a regiment composed of
Germans, occupying an advance post of General McCook’s division of the
Federal army in Kentucky, was attacked on the 17th of December, by three
regiments of Arkansas infantry, Colonel Terry’s Texan Rangers, and Major
Phifer’s cavalry, and also an artillery company, with four pieces, the
whole under the command of General T. C. Hindman.

Colonel Willich’s regiment was guarding a new bridge built by the
Federal troops over Green river, at Rowlett’s Station, on the Louisville
and Nashville railroad, a temporary substitute for the handsome iron
structure which had been destroyed by the rebels, in front of
Mumfordsville. A picket guard of two companies had been thrown across
the river on the south side, occupying a wide area of cleared ground,
which was skirted by forests, from whence the rebels attempted to
surprise and capture them.

The second company, Captain Glass, was acting in detached squads as
pickets in the woods on the right flank, and were attacked in detail by
the enemy’s skirmishers. The pickets made a gallant defence, and fell
back slowly and in good order on their supports. The alarm in the mean
time having been given to the other companies on the north side of the
river, they started in “double-quick” over the bridge, crossed the hill
on the opposite side, and rushed with fierce haste into the woods whence
the firing proceeded, led on by Lieutenant-Colonel Treba, Colonel
Willich at the time being necessarily at headquarters. A portion of the
third company, under Lieutenant Sachs, occupied a covered position on
the left flank, where they were now attacked by the advancing enemy.
Unable to restrain the ardor of his men, the Lieutenant boldly left his
sheltered position and attacked the rebels in the open field; but fierce
as his onset was, the disparity of numbers proved too greatly against
him, and his little band would have inevitably been cut to pieces but
for the timely arrival of Lieutenant-Colonel Treba, with the main body
of the regiment. He sent the sixth, seventh and tenth companies to
support the second company on the right, and the first, fifth, eighth
and ninth companies to support the third company on the left flank. At
the very first rush of the skirmishers, the enemy were thrown into
confusion, and driven back at all points.

Then the most severe and bloody part of the battle commenced. With
terrible ferocity Colonel Terry’s regiment of Texas Rangers poured in
black masses of cavalry upon the Union skirmishers along the whole line.
They rode up within fifteen or twenty yards, some even in the very midst
of the men, and commenced a terrible fire from their carbines and
revolvers. At their first onset, it seemed as if every one of the men
would be destroyed. But here it was that the veteran coolness and
bravery of the Union troops shone forth. They allowed the enemy to come
almost as near as he chose, and then poured a deadly fire upon him,
which shook the entire line. Upon the right flank of the third company’s
position, by order of Adjutant Schmidt, the eighth company was led forth
by Lieutenants Kappel and Levy; upon the left, Lieutenant-Colonel Treba
advanced with the ninth company; both attacked the enemy in close
skirmishers’ line, drove him back, and rescued the rest of the heroic
little band under Lieutenant Sachs. He himself and a number of his men
were, however, already killed, though they had made the enemy pay dearly
for their lives.

Now the artillery of the enemy was brought to bear upon the Union men.
Their fire, balls and shrapnell, was well directed, but fortunately not
very fatal. Only a few of the men were wounded by splinters of balls.

While this was going on upon the left wing, the conflict on the right
was no less severe. The second, sixth and tenth companies were scattered
as skirmishers, while the seventh was drawn up in company column for
their support. The sixth company had taken position behind a fence. The
Rangers galloped up to them in close line, and commenced firing from
rifles and revolvers. Their fire was steadily returned by the sixth,
which held them in check till a part of them got behind the fence, when
the skirmishers fell back behind the seventh, drawn up in a square. Now
a fearful conflict ensued. A whole battalion of Rangers, fully two
hundred strong, bore down upon the little band of not more than fifty.
Upon the front and left flank of the square they rushed, with a fierce
attempt to trample down the squad before them.

Captain Welschbellich allowed them to come within a distance of seventy
yards, then fired a volley, which staggered and sent them back. But
immediately afterward they reformed and again rushed fiercely upon the
front and both flanks of the square. They seemed frantic with rage over
the successful resistance offered to them, and this time many of their
band rode up to the points of the bayonets. But another well-aimed
volley emptied a number of saddles, and sent back the whole mass which a
moment before had threatened certain destruction to Captain
Welschbellich’s company. A few bayonet thrusts and scattering shots
brought down those who had ventured to the front. This second repulse
had a marked effect. Yet a third attack was made, much less determined
and fierce than the two first, though it was more disastrous to the
enemy. During this third attack it was that Colonel Terry, the commander
of the Rangers, was killed. Upon his fall, the whole column broke and
fled in wild dismay.

But in place of the Rangers, a whole regiment of infantry, accompanied
by their band of music, now marched against the “invincible square.”
Before this overpowering force Captain Welschbellich deemed it prudent
to retire, and united with the second, sixth and tenth companies again.

About this time it was that Colonel Willich, with his battle horse in a
foam, arrived upon the field. He saw the right wing retiring, and the
entire infantry of the enemy, two regiments, coming on, thus endangering
the retreat of the left wing. He therefore ordered the signal for
“retiring slowly” to be given, and collected the companies. The second
company, under Captain Glass, and the seventh, under Captain
Welschbellich, were the first who took their places in the line of
battle of the regiment.

About this time a manœuvre was executed by the first company, under
Captain Erdemeyer, which decided the day. When the battle commenced, and
the impression prevailed that the Unionists were fighting cavalry alone,
Lieutenant-Colonel Treba had detached this company to take a position
and attack the flank of the enemy. When the first company arrived at the
place of destination, Captain Erdemeyer found that the enemy had
likewise a large force of infantry and artillery, to attack which would
have been certain destruction to his company. He therefore kept his
covered position until the time mentioned. Then, finding the larger part
of the infantry drawn to another part of the field, he ordered an
advance. His appearance was the signal of a general retreat of the
enemy. The rest of the cavalry fled, the artillery retired in haste, and
the infantry followed as quickly.

The Union loss was eleven killed, twenty wounded, and five missing. The
enemy left a large number of killed on the field, and among their dead
was the body of Colonel Terry. The rebel loss was thirty-three killed
and sixty wounded.




               CAPTURE OF REBEL RECRUITS AT MILFORD, MO.


On the eighteenth of December, Brigadier-General Pope, commanding the
Federal troops in the central district of Missouri, made a brilliant and
successful movement, which resulted in the capture of a considerable
number of the enemy.

[Illustration: _H. W. Halleck_]

It will be recollected that the withdrawal of the Federal troops from
Springfield and the leading points of both central and southern
Missouri, had given free scope to the action of the enemy. Seditious
proclamations had been issued by Ex-Governor Jackson and General Price,
and had been thoroughly circulated. Enlisting agents, also, had been
very active, and some two thousand recruits, mostly drawn from the
northern counties, were proceeding by slow stages southward, to unite
with the main body under General Price.

A well laid plan was matured by Generals Halleck and Pope to capture
these reinforcements; and two brigades of General Pope’s division were
dispatched without exciting any suspicion as to their destination, to
intercept the enemy on their march. The brigades were constituted as
follows:

First Brigade, Acting Brigadier-General Steele.—Twenty-seventh regiment
Ohio Volunteers, Colonel Kennett; Twenty-second regiment Indiana
Volunteers, Colonel Hendricks; First regiment Kansas Volunteers, Colonel
Thayer; one battery First Missouri Volunteers, Lieutenant Marr; four
companies regular cavalry, Colonel Amory.

Second Brigade, Acting Brigadier-General Jeff. C. Davis.—Eighteenth
regiment Indiana Volunteers, Colonel Patterson; Eighth regiment Indiana
Volunteers, Colonel Benton; Twenty-fourth regiment Indiana Volunteers,
Lieutenant ——; one battery First Missouri Artillery, Lieutenant Klaus;
one squadron First Iowa Cavalry, Major Torrence.

The whole was under the immediate command of General Pope. The four
companies of regular cavalry were the fragments of the original
companies, B, C, D, and E, and numbered but a little over a hundred men.
They were under the command of Captain Crittenden, of the regular army,
son of Hon. John J. Crittenden.

The command started from Sedalia on Sunday, the 15th, and encamped at
night eleven miles distant on the road to Clinton. The next day they
marched twenty-six miles, and at sunset arrived at Shawnee Mound, in
Henry county. Here reports of various companies of rebels began to come
in from residents and from Union scouts. One company of near five
hundred was heard of at a point about twelve miles north-west, and
several smaller bodies directly south, from Clinton to Butler. General
Pope then dispatched his whole available force of cavalry, nearly seven
hundred, before they had secured three hours’ rest, after the five
hundred near Morristown. The cavalry under Lieutenant-Colonel Brown, of
the Seventh Missouri Volunteers, pushed on all night, and arriving at
the rebel camp they found it vacated. The enemy had received warning and
fled precipitately, leaving numerous evidences of haste. The cavalry,
notwithstanding their forty miles’ continuous march, pushed on after the
fleeing rebels till they reached Rose Hill, picking up some twenty or
thirty stragglers on the road. At Rose Hill the rebels separated into
several squads, some taking the road west, others taking the south route
to Butler, and Colonel Brown had no other alternative than to rest his
exhausted horses, and finally to make his way back to the main column
next day, near Warrensburg. He brought in nearly one hundred prisoners.

General Pope in the meantime kept advancing in a direction west of north
to Chilhowee, a most important point, being the centre of numerous
cross-roads. This was near the site of the rebel camp just referred to,
and here the pickets brought in some few straggling men who were bound
for Price’s army. At Chilhowee they heard of a rebel force of 1,800 from
the north, and of the scouring of the country south of Clinton by Major
Hubbard, of the First Missouri Cavalry. The direction of the Union
forces was at once east, toward Warrenburg. That night (Wednesday) they
encamped two and a half miles west of Warrenburg. The reports were
confirmed by a loyal man, who was on his way to give the information. He
gave their location as at Kilpatrick’s mill, on the Clear fork of
Blackwater Creek. (Milford is the post-office name.) Early on Thursday
morning they started in the direction of Knob Noster, being directly
south of the enemy. Colonel Merrill’s Horse was ordered to take the
direct road running parallel with the course of the Blackwater, so as to
intercept them in case they took a western course.

The brigade of Colonel Davis was placed in the advance, with orders to
keep well up to the cavalry, a section of artillery being ready to
support the cavalry upon a minute’s warning. General Pope, with the main
body, kept due west for Knob Noster, ready to come up if necessary.
Colonel Davis, finding that the enemy was still in camp at Milford,
diverged to the left, and put the regular cavalry, under Lieutenant
Amory, in the advance, the four companies of the First Iowa Cavalry,
under Major Torrence, being next. On approaching the mill, the men
discovered that the rebels were posted on the opposite side of the
bridge, across the dam. Finding that it would be dangerous to charge the
bridge mounted, Lieutenant Amory ordered the men to dismount and
skirmish with pistols and sabres, as infantry, the fourth man holding
the horses of the other three. This they instantly did, and advanced
under the lead of Lieutenant Gordon, of Company D. Some ineffectual
skirmishing took place between the regulars, who were sheltered behind a
barn on the south of the creek, and the rebels, who were on the north
side. During this interval the Iowa Cavalry filed off to the left, in
the attempt to cross the stream higher up, but after vainly traversing
its steep sides and muddy bottom for a mile, returned to find Lieutenant
Amory charging across the bridge, the rebels having deserted it upon
seeing Colonel Davis, with the artillery advancing. Lieutenant Amory
followed the road, thinking that the rebels might flee to the north.
Lieutenant Gordon immediately dashed after some of the scattering
fugitives through the wood, and after penetrating a few rods, received a
volley from the enemy, whom he just then discovered formed in line. He
instantly formed in line, and ordered his men to fire.

The cavalry, under Major Torrence, and the regulars, under Lieutenant
Amory, had in the mean time reached the flank and rear of another body
of the enemy, who was thus enclosed on one side by a long marsh, on the
other by a deep and muddy mill-pond, and on the third by our cavalry.
Colonel Davis had by this time come up in the rear. A white flag was
displayed, and Colonel Alexander, a young man, came forward and asked if
thirty minutes would be allowed them for consultation. Colonel Davis’s
answer was “that as night was closing in, that was too long.” Colonel A.
then asked if he would be allowed to go to headquarters and bring back
the answer of the commander of the corps, Colonel Robinson. Permission
being granted, he returned in about five minutes, with the response that
“they would be obliged to surrender as prisoners of war.” The arms were
stacked, and the men formed in line and marched between two files of
infantry, the Eighteenth and Twenty-fourth Illinois, with all the honors
of war. Colonel Davis immediately sent dispatches to General Pope
announcing his success, and as night was closing around, the arms were
hastily stowed in wagons, and the Federal troops commenced the march for
camp. One thousand guns of all kinds were captured, with a full supply
of clothing and provision. One of the enemy was killed, and several
wounded. Two Federals were killed and eight wounded.

Dispatches were received Thursday evening from General Halleck ordering
the Union troops to fall back to Sedalia. General Pope, therefore,
accompanied with the victors as an escort, and the wounded men, started
and made the journey (twenty miles) by two o’clock.

Following close upon them was the brigade of Colonel Hovey, of the
Twenty-fourth Indiana, who had been dispatched with two regiments, a
battery, and two squadrons of the First Missouri Cavalry, on the Clinton
road some twelve miles from Sedalia, where the cavalry, under Major
Hubbard, some two hundred and fifty in number, made a reconnoissance of
the country extending westward and southward, as far as the Grand river,
beyond Clinton. Here they came upon the pickets of General Rains, who,
with an advanced cavalry force was guarding the Grand river. The pickets
were driven in, one shot, about sixty prisoners taken within the lines
of General Rains, and a mill near Clinton burned.

The detachment of cavalry under Lieutenant-Colonel Brown also burned a
mill near Johnstown, on the borders of Bates county. His force travelled
two hundred and fifty miles in six days.

Colonel Hovey, of the Twenty-fourth Indiana, effected a successful ruse,
whereby he succeeded in making a capture of six prisoners and two
hundred bushels of corn meal. He was ordered by General Turner to
reconnoitre with about a hundred men on the road to Clinton. He left on
Monday morning, taking Fairview and Siseonville on his route. Learning
on Tuesday that a party of the enemy was encamped at a mill near Chapel
Hill, he adopted a scheme for capturing the whole of them next day.

He ordered his men into the wagons, and had them drawn, with the
exception of a small guard, resembling a provision train. As they
approached Hall’s store the rebels appeared in the brush ready to seize
the train. One of his officers rode around a hill to see the whereabouts
of the party, when he encountered a mounted rebel, who raised his
shot-gun, when he was brought to the ground by a revolver. Colonel Hovey
then ordered his men to emerge from their concealment, and a search was
made for the enemy. One of them was wounded in the fray, and one killed,
two balls lodging in his neck. A few horses and mules were captured,
some of which were branded U. S. The mill was afterward burned, and the
meal put in Hovey’s wagons.

The total number of prisoners taken exceeded sixteen hundred. The march
was accomplished in exceeding cold weather, and many of the troops
suffered severely.




                       BATTLE OF DRANESVILLE, VA.

                           DECEMBER 20, 1861.


In the month of December, the Pennsylvania reserve regiments, under the
command of Major-General McCall, constituted the right wing of the great
Potomac army. The division occupied an extensive range of country,
beyond Langley’s church and tavern, the encampments stretching toward
Lewinsville. Beyond this, north-westwardly, an open country extended, in
the direction of Leesburg, some twelve or fifteen miles, unoccupied by
hostile forces. Midway was the village of Dranesville, a small town,
almost deserted.

It having been determined to send a foraging party to take possession of
a quantity of hay, oats and provender known to be in this neighborhood,
the brigade of General E. O. C. Ord, the third of McCall’s division, was
assigned to the duty.

The force consisted of the Sixth regiment, Colonel W. W. Rickets; Ninth,
Colonel C. F. Jackson; Tenth, Colonel John S. McCalmont; Twelfth,
Colonel John H. Taggart. The regiment of riflemen known as the
Bucktails, Lieutenant-Colonel Thomas L. Kane; a battery of two
twenty-four-pounders and two twelve-pounders, commanded by Captain
Easton, and a detachment of cavalry from Colonel Bayard’s regiment, also
accompanied the expedition. Each regiment was strongly represented, and
there were about four thousand men in the expedition. The order for
march was received on Thursday evening, the men being directed to take
with them one day’s rations. The morning was clear, and rather cold,
with a slight mist around the sun, and a thin layer of frost whitening
the road and coating the grass. The Bucktails were assigned the advance
of the infantry column, the cavalry preceding as scouts, and battery
being in reserve. Colonel Taggart’s regiment brought up the rear. A
number of teams were also in company. Each regiment had two companies of
flankers thrown out, on either side of the column, to scour the woods,
search the thickets, and prevent the column from falling into an
ambuscade. They halted at Difficult Creek, a narrow stream, with a heavy
stone bridge. The stream is fordable, the average width being thirty
feet.

The march continued. The day became warm, the sky soft and clear, as the
soldiers approached Dranesville. About noon the flanking companies of
the Twelfth regiment came in and reported that a large body of rebels
could be seen from a neighboring hill. At another part of the line shots
were exchanged between the hidden enemy and the Union flanking
companies. Instantly a line of battle was formed, but no enemy appeared,
and the firing ceased.

The delay was that of a few minutes. The Union men were anxious,
expectant, and enthusiastic. Suddenly a fire was opened upon our line
from a wood or thicket nearly a mile distant. The enemy’s battery
contained six guns, and was placed in a road skirting the wood, and
sheltered by it. Their guns were of large calibre, and they fired
shells. At first they passed over the column and exploded beyond. The
rebel artillerymen discovered this, altered their range, and their
shells fell short. In the mean time, Easton’s battery was brought into
position on the side of an elevation in front of the Twelfth regiment,
which was in line of battle. General Ord himself sighted the guns, and a
sharp fire was opened upon the enemy.

The Union infantry laid down on their arms, awaiting the orders of their
superior officers. At length the fire of the enemy began to be irregular
and uncertain, proving that they either intended to retreat or change
position. At this time Colonel Kane, who was on the right of the column,
discovered the infantry of the enemy passing through an open clearing
near the wood, evidently intending a flank movement, or designing to
occupy a brick house within a hundred yards of his regiment. He sent a
detachment of twenty men, under command of Lieutenant Rice, to take the
house, which they did, and, under shelter of its walls, opened fire upon
the advancing regiments. Having bestowed the family found in this house
safely in the cellar, the small garrison demolished the windows and
attacked the enemy, which was afterwards discovered to be an Alabama
regiment, under command of Colonel John H. Forney; a Kentucky regiment,
commanded by Colonel Tom Taylor; and a South Carolina regiment. They
took the shelter of underbrush, and, under the supposition that the
house was filled by Union troops, opened a heavy fire upon it, supported
by two small guns, which threw shot and shell upon it. They advanced
nearer and nearer every volley, the brave Union riflemen firing rapidly
and with great effect. Colonel Kane was among them all the time,
inspiring them with his example. They fell on the ground, they loaded
their pieces, rising suddenly, taking deliberate aim, and lying down to
load again. The burden of the enemy’s fire was directed at the house,
and it was shattered and pierced, the roof being broken, and some of the
walls giving way.

The Federal fire was so terrific that the enemy fell back from the
advanced position they had assumed, abandoned their flanking manœuvre,
and retreated to the woods under cover of their battery, which kept up
an irregular and uncertain fire. The Bucktails advanced in pursuit. As
they rose to follow, Colonel Kane, who was leading them, was wounded. He
fell, but instantly arose, and continued to advance. In the mean time
General Ord ordered the line to charge and take the battery. The order
was given to the Twelfth regiment, Colonel John H. Taggart commanding.
It was received with a cheer by the men, and they advanced in the
direction of the unseen battery. They proceeded to the edge of the wood
and entered, keeping the line as straight and precise as on dress
parade. The wood was dense, and so impenetrable that the men found it
difficult to proceed. Colonel Taggart threw his scabbard away and
preceded his men with his drawn sword in one hand and his pistol in the
other.

They came into an open clearing, only to find that the rebels had
retreated in the most precipitate manner. While the Union troops were
crowding through the woods, the enemy had started along the Leesburg
road, taking their cannon, but leaving their dead and wounded, and large
quantities of arms and ammunition. A single caisson remained. Their
magazine had been struck by a shell, and exploded with appalling effect.
Around it the dead and dying were heaped in masses—fifteen men and five
horses being killed. The Union men were wild with the enthusiasm of
victory, and having placed the wounded in the houses near by, and
chopped the gun-carriages to splinters, they started in pursuit of the
retreating foe.

This was about three o’clock. General McCall, with his staff, had
arrived on the ground only to hear of a victory won. Knowing that an
advance would be fatal, he ordered a recall, and with the wounded and
dead, and the trophies of war, the troops returned from the field.

The brave and victorious band arrived at Langley’s about nine o’clock in
the evening, where they were met by thousands of their shouting and
exultant comrades.

The rebel troops engaged in this battle were on the same errand. Two
hundred wagons had been sent out by General Stuart, their commander,
under the care of a foraging party, escorted by the Eleventh Virginia,
Colonel Garland; the Sixth South Carolina, under Lieutenant-Colonel A.
J. Secrest; the Tenth Alabama, Colonel John H. Forney; the First
Kentucky, Colonel Sam. Taylor; the Sumter Flying Artillery, Captain
Cutts, and detachments from Ransom’s and Radford’s Cavalry. The rebel
troops fought well, and did honor to themselves as soldiers, whose nerve
and bravery would have been worthy of triumph in a sacred cause. Their
loss was seventy-five killed, one hundred and fifty wounded, and thirty
prisoners. Of the Federals, seven were killed and sixty-one wounded.




                       EXPEDITION TO SHIP ISLAND.

                            DECEMBER, 1861.


General B. F. Butler, after having been stationed for a short time at
Fortress Monroe, was assigned to the North-Eastern Department, and
located his headquarters at Boston, where he superintended the
organization of the New England troops, and the fitting out of an
expedition intended to make a demonstration at some point on the
Southern coast. A portion of his troops sailed from Boston on the 23d of
November, in the steam transport Constitution, which arrived at Fortress
Monroe on the 26th, with the Twenty-sixth Massachusetts, and the Ninth
Connecticut regiments, and Captain Manning’s battery—making a total of
one thousand nine hundred men. Brigadier-General J. W. Phelps here took
the command, and reached Ship Island harbor, in Mississippi Sound,
December 3.

On the west end of this island there was a partly-finished fort,
occupied by Lieutenant Buchanan and one hundred and seventy sailors and
marines, with several ship guns in position. The rebels had evacuated
the island in September, destroying what they could not carry away with
them.

General Phelps, on assuming the command of Ship Island, published a
proclamation “To the loyal citizens of the South-west,” in which he
defined the political “motives and principles” by which his command
would be governed. He then at the very opening of his address, declared
that every slave State admitted into the Union since the adoption of the
Constitution, had been admitted in direct violation of that instrument.
That every slave State that existed as such at the adoption of the
Constitution, was by that act placed under the “highest obligation of
honor and morality to abolish slavery.” The rest of the “proclamation”
was in harmony with these statements. General Phelps made an official
report of his expedition to General Butler, who reported the facts to
the Adjutant-General of the United States. General Phelps was commended
for the successful manner in which he had performed his military duties,
but his proclamation was pronounced superfluous and uncalled for.

The occupancy of Ship Island being secured, the forces remained in
undisturbed possession, awaiting the future movements of the commander
of the expedition.




                       ENGAGEMENT AT MOUNT ZION.

                           DECEMBER 28, 1861.


On the 23d of December, General Prentiss, commanding the army of
Northern Missouri, having his headquarters at Palmyra, received orders
to disperse a body of the enemy’s forces that had concentrated in Boone
County. In pursuance of his instructions he started on the following
morning with two hundred of the Third Missouri Cavalry, Colonel John
Glover, and five companies of Sharpshooters, under Colonel Birge, and
arrived at Sturgeon on the evening of the 26th.

During the following day, having learned that there was a concentration
of rebels near the village of Hallsville, in Boone County, General
Prentiss sent forward one company of cavalry, commanded by Captain
Howland, to reconnoitre in that vicinity. Captain Howland proceeded to
Hallsville, but found no rebels. After proceeding about two miles
beyond, his advance guard encountered the rebels in force, commanded by
Colonel Dorsey. Captain Howland endeavored to draw off his company,
having taken nine prisoners, but was overpowered. Being wounded, and
having lost his horse, he was taken prisoner, with one private of his
company. The remainder of his men made good their retreat, arriving at
Sturgeon at nine o’clock, P. M.

Having learned the position of the enemy, General Prentiss ordered his
command, numbering in all four hundred and seventy, to march at two
o’clock, A. M., at which hour he started, and after marching a distance
of sixteen miles, at eight o’clock A. M. of the 28th inst. found one
company of rebels, commanded by Captain Johnson, in position to the left
of the road leading from Hallsville to Mount Zion. General Prentiss
ordered two companies of sharpshooters to pass to the rear of the enemy,
and one of cavalry to dismount and engage them in the front.

Colonel Glover opened fire, and succeeded in killing five and capturing
seven prisoners, from whom was ascertained the number and position of
the main force—the enemy being posted at a church, known as Mount Zion,
in Boone County, one mile and a half in advance, numbering near nine
hundred men. General Prentiss ordered the cavalry under Colonel Glover
forward, accompanied by two companies of Birge’s sharpshooters. Colonel
Birge, arriving near the encampment, ordered one troop of cavalry to
dismount and engage the enemy. The sharpshooters were afterward ordered
through a field on the right to skirmish with the enemy’s left, and if
possible drive them from the woods.

The firing being heavy, and these three companies proving unable to
drive the enemy from his cover, Colonel Glover, with his available
force, moved in double-quick to their aid, and for half an hour longer
the battle raged and became a hand-to-hand fight. Captain Boyd’s company
of sharpshooters were in the midst of the rebel camp. Also, Major
Carrick, with Company C of the Cavalry. When Colonel Glover arrived, the
enemy retreated, leaving in the Federal hands 90 horses and 105 stand of
arms. The battle was brought to a close about 11 A. M.

The reserve of two companies coming into action at the moment the enemy
gave way, the victory was complete. After collecting the wounded, the
Federals proceeded to care for those of the enemy, placing them in the
church, and sent for farmers and friends in the vicinity to render
assistance, when they returned to Sturgeon, where they arrived at 9, P.
M. The loss in the battle of Mount Zion, and in the engagement of the
evening previous, was: Killed, 3; slightly wounded, 46; severely
wounded, 17. Rebel loss: Killed, 25; wounded, 150.




                       ARKANSAS, AND THE INDIANS.


The prominent and active men in the State of Arkansas, and particularly
all who held official positions, were allied politically with the South
Carolina conspirators, while the majority of the people, in the early
stages of the insurrection, were loyal. Hence, the leaders were slow in
their movements to carry the State out of the Union; but when the
Confederate government had become organized, and transferred to
Richmond, and the rebellion had been fully inaugurated by the attack on
Fort Sumter, followed by the proclamation of President Lincoln, they
deemed that the time had come for the development of their plans. The
Governor of the State, Henry M. Rector, on the 22d of April, 1861,
directed the seizure by State troops of the United States stores at
Napoleon; followed on the 24th by the capture of Fort Smith by the
forces under Colonel Borland.

The Legislature being convened at Little Rock, an unconditional
ordinance of Secession was passed on the 6th of May, and on the 18th the
Confederate Congress at Richmond declared the admission of Arkansas to
the Southern Confederacy.

It was the misfortune of the loyal men of the State that they did not
number in their ranks any citizens of power and influence, who had
energy sufficient to organize the Unionists, and oppose a barrier to the
acts of the enemies of the Federal Government. Unarmed and unorganized,
while the conspirators were in a state of preparation for any resistance
that might be made, protest and opposition were of no avail, and the
loyal men of the State were compelled to submit, and endure the
persecutions and depredations of the more numerous secessionists.

A great deal of excitement was occasioned during the month of November
by the discovery that the Union men of Izard, Fulton, Independent and
Searcey counties had secret organizations and societies for mutual
protection and co-operation. This accidental disclosure exasperated the
conspirators, who adopted the most violent measures to disperse the
Unionists, and break up their associations. Many were taken to Little
Rock and hanged, while others were arrested in the woods, attempting to
escape beyond the State, and shared the same fate. Large numbers of
refugees, however, succeeded in reaching Missouri, where they remained,
and subsequently, under Captain Ware, a member of the Arkansas
Legislature, organized as a military body at Rolla, Missouri, and
entered the service under General Curtis, receiving large accessions on
the marching of Curtis’ expedition into the State.

Impressed with the importance of securing the services of the Indian
tribes within the limits of Arkansas, as well as the adjoining
territory, the agents of the Richmond government were instructed to
negotiate with the Cherokees and Creeks on the borders of Arkansas,
promising the payment of the United States annuities by the Confederacy
in case of their allegiance. On the 24th of August an agreement was
entered into by some of the Cherokee chiefs, and the two tribes raised
2,000 men for the war. The nations were divided on the question, the
most intelligent being convinced that loyalty to the Federal Government
was their true policy not less than their duty. The Choctaws,
Chickasaws, and other tribes were treated in a similar manner, and with
the same results—secession having the effect of dividing the Red Men of
the forest as it had divided the pale faces of the east.

From authentic sources it was learned from the Seminole agency that
Opothleyoholo, a loyal chief, had collected together four or five
thousand Indians, and about thirteen hundred negroes, who had gone to
him with the hope of being rendered free. When General Cooper (rebel,)
at the head of the Creek, Choctaw and Chickasaw regiments, with other
Indians, amounting to near five thousand, advanced upon Opothleyoholo’s
camp, his followers fled, leaving all behind. Opothleyoholo left with a
few adherents for the south-west. Most of his followers were reported to
be with Colonel Cooper, who was said to have a very large Indian force
with him.




                      BOMBARDMENT AT FORT PICKENS.


On the 1st of January, 1862, Fort Pickens with the rebel forts and
batteries on the Bay of Pensacola again awoke the thunders of their
heavy artillery, whose tremendous explosions reverberated for thirty
miles along the Florida coast.

The loyal garrison at the fort had been long chafing under the
restraints of continued inaction. The commander, Colonel Harvey Brown,
Fifth United States Artillery, had been anxiously awaiting the time when
a sufficient force would be at his command to drive the unwelcome foe
from his position near the fort.

Lieutenant Adam J. Slemmer, of Pennsylvania, of the First United States
Artillery, the former brave commander, who saved the fort by his courage
and loyalty, on the 12th of January, 1861, had been relieved, on account
of ill-health. He received a Major’s commission in the Sixteenth United
States Infantry, May 14th, 1861.

On the first day of the year a small steamer was seen from Fort Pickens
making her way toward the Navy Yard. She was a saucy, defiant looking
craft, and some one on board waved a secession flag ostentatiously in
sight, as if challenging a fire. This was an exasperating insult to the
restive men shut up in the fort. Colonel Brown had frequently warned
General Bragg against forcing the presence of these insolent steamers
upon him, and when this presumptuous little craft approached Fort
Pickens, with its flag in commotion, he opened fire upon her. She drew
in her flag and retreated instantly with a crestfallen, retrograde
movement, in amusing contrast with her first approach.

The fire from Fort Pickens was directly answered by all the rebel
batteries, and in a brief time the engagement became general. The firing
on both sides was kept up through the entire day, and at night Pickens
maintained a slow fire from her thirteen-inch mortars, which was
promptly returned by the rebels.

About midnight a conflagration broke out in the Navy Yard. It flamed up
furiously, consuming the buildings of the Yard, and spreading to the
town of Woolsey, adjoining the Navy Yard on the north, where it raged
all night.

The scene during the night was wonderfully magnificent. Every shell
could be tracked in its course through the air from the moment it left
the gun until it exploded, scattering destruction all around. These
shells, rising up against a cloud of surging flame, which sent its red
light in a continued glare landward and seaward, formed an appalling
spectacle. The minutest outline of the grim fort seemed sketched on a
back-ground of fire, rendering the light which Colonel Brown hung out
from its walls, in scornful bravado, offering a sure mark to the enemy,
scarcely more than one of the ten thousand sparks that filled the
atmosphere with gleams of gold. Far off over the beautiful land the
light of that conflagration spread, filling the inhabitants with alarm;
and so brightly did it flame over the ocean, that the United States
steamer Mercedita floated in the glow of its ruddy light when over
twenty miles at sea.

Through the heat of this conflagration the guns kept up their slow
booming thunder, adding to the sublime interest of the scene. The firing
on both sides was remarkable for its extreme accuracy. Shells in
countless numbers fell inside of Fort Pickens, and were returned with
double vigor by its guns.

All the batteries were engaged, and did their work admirably. Fort
McRae, which had been so roughly handled by the Federal squadron at the
last engagement, resumed its accustomed vigor, and Battery Scott kept up
a constant fire throughout the engagement.

Several ships of the squadron were present, but took no part in the
fight. It was well they did not, for nothing could have been gained, and
probably much would have been lost had they attempted to oppose their
wooden sides to stone walls and earthworks.

The bombardment was the old story of fort against fort, at a distance
too great for any decisive result. The Unionists gained nothing, yet
expended a large amount of powder, shot and shell, and the enemy had no
greater advantage. Apart from the burning of Warrington, the Navy Yard
and Woolsey, no injury worth speaking of was sustained. The next day
Fort Pickens stood out against the sky grim and strong as it was before
the bombardment. There were but few if any casualties worth recording
during this affair. Even Colonel Brown’s lantern, hung out to guide the
rebel shot, failed to invite any real injury; and except that it left a
wide field of devastation behind, the bombardment of Fort Pickens had
few important results.




              ROUT OF GENERAL MARSHALL AT PAINTSVILLE, KY.

                            JANUARY 7, 1862.


On the 7th of January, Colonel Garfield, who had his encampment on Muddy
Creek, in Eastern Kentucky, marched to attack the rebel General
Marshall, who with a large force of men and a battery of four pieces,
was known to have an entrenched camp at Paintsville, the capital of
Johnson county. Colonel Garfield’s command, composed of the Forty-second
Ohio, the Fourteenth Kentucky, and Major McLaughlin’s squadron of Ohio
cavalry, making an effective force of about fifteen hundred men, broke
up their camp on Muddy Creek, and moved toward Paintsville. While on the
march they were reinforced by a battalion of the First Virginia cavalry,
under Colonel Bolles, and by three hundred of the Twenty-second
Kentucky, raising the force to about twenty-two hundred men. The enemy,
under Humphrey Marshall, numbering three thousand five hundred men, and
having a battery of four pieces, learned of the approach, and also that
of the Fortieth Ohio and of four hundred of Colonel Wolford’s cavalry by
the way of Mount Sterling and the valley of the Paint Creek. They had,
two days previously, after burning large quantities of grain, broken up
their intrenched camp, and effected a retreat to the heights on Middle
Creek, two miles distant from Prestonburg. They had left a corps of
observation at the mouth of Jennie Creek, three miles west from
Paintsville, of three hundred cavalry, and a large force of infantry
about seven miles up Jennie Creek, to protect and facilitate the passage
of their trains.

Immediately on arriving Colonel Garfield, learning the position of this
cavalry, but unaware of the whereabouts of the other divisions of the
rebel force, immediately commenced the erection of a pontoon or floating
bridge across the Paint Lick Creek, at Paintsville. At four P. M. he
crossed with eight companies of the Forty-second Ohio, and two companies
of the Fourteenth Kentucky, with a view of making an armed
reconnoissance, and if possible of cutting off and capturing the
cavalry. At two P. M. he had dispatched Colonel Bolles’ cavalry and one
company of the Forty-second, under the command of Captain S. M. Barber,
with orders to give a good account of the cavalry. But later in the day,
on learning the possibility of cutting them off, he had sent orders to
Colonel Bolles not to attack them until he had obtained time to get in
their rear. Not receiving the last orders, and indeed before they were
issued, Colonel Bolles, in obedience to his first directions, crossed
the Paint by fording, and vigorously assaulting the enemy, soon put them
to flight up the valley of Jennie. In their haste, followed as they were
by the cavalry, they strewed the road with their equipments, while here
and there a dead or wounded soldier gave proof that they were losing men
also. The pursuit was kept up for seven miles, right into the infantry
division which was guarding the train. Stationed on either side of the
road, that did not permit more than two to ride abreast, it opened a
heavy cross-fire on the Union cavalry, compelling them to fall back, and
finally to retreat, which they did in good order, having inflicted a
loss of twenty-five in killed and wounded, according to rebel account,
and losing but two killed and one wounded. Fifteen rebels were taken
prisoners. Meanwhile Colonel Garfield, with his command, having remained
a short time to fully explore the enemy’s deserted fortifications,
(consisting of lunettes, breastworks, rifle-pits and a fort situated on
the top of a conical hill,) and wholly unaware of what had taken place,
pressed forward to the hoped for consummation of the march. But few
miles had been traversed, however, when the evidences of a hasty retreat
became so apparent that all were convinced that the enemy had flown. The
object of the march having been thus thwarted, an early return to
Paintsville became desirable, and it was accomplished at the dawn.




                      BATTLE OF MIDDLE CREEK, KY.

                           JANUARY 10, 1862.


Having recruited his men by a night’s rest at Paintsville, Colonel
Garfield was preparing to start in immediate pursuit on the morning of
the 8th, but receiving information of the superior force of the enemy,
he awaited the arrival of the Fortieth Ohio regiment, and Wolford’s
Kentucky cavalry, by way of Mount Sterling. These troops joined him on
that day, raising his effective force to about two thousand four hundred
men, after deducting Colonel Bolle’s Virginia cavalry, which, in
obedience to orders, had returned to Guyandotte in that State. On the
9th, Colonel Garfield detailed from the Forty-second and Fortieth Ohio,
and Fourteenth Kentucky each three hundred men, and from the
Twenty-second Kentucky two hundred men, and taking the immediate
command, supported, however, by Colonel Craner of the Fortieth, and
Major Burke of the Fourteenth. After detaching Colonel Wolford’s and
Major McLaughlin’s cavalry up Jennie’s Creek, he marched up the river
road leading to Prestonburg. Early on the morning of the 10th, Colonel
Sheldon of the Forty-second Ohio, in command at the camp, received a
dispatch from Colonel Garfield, stating that he had found the enemy, and
asking reinforcements. In compliance with the order, at six A. M. on the
tenth, Colonel Sheldon marched with eight hundred men, who eagerly
pressed forward on their way to the scene of action. As Colonel Garfield
had stated, he had found the enemy two miles from Prestonburg, on Middle
Creek, in a chosen position among the hills, with between four and five
thousand men and four pieces of artillery. The Fifth Virginia regiment,
Colonel Trigg, Colonel John S. Williams’ Kentucky regiment, Colonel
Moore’s Kentucky regiment, Markham and Wicher’s cavalry, and the Fourth
Virginia infantry, lay in full strength on the hills at the forks of the
creek, while their battery seemed to forbid all approach. Nothing
deterred by the formidable position and number of the enemy, Colonel
Garfield, not fully aware of their exact locality, sent skirmishers
forward with a view of drawing the enemy’s fire, and thus ascertaining
his whereabouts. Not succeeding in this, about noon he sent forward his
escort of cavalry, some twenty strong, in a headlong charge. This
accomplished the object, for the enemy, thinking the whole Union force
upon them, opened with musketry, shot and shell upon the cavalry, and a
small party of the skirmishers under Adjutant Olds of the Forty-second,
then in a cornfield immediately in front of the position of Colonel
Williams’ Kentucky regiment, and flanked on the left by the artillery
and Trigg’s Virginia regiment. The cavalry made a hasty retreat, and the
enemy concentrated their whole fire on Adjutant Olds and his party, but
without effect. After replying with some fifteen rounds of musketry, and
observing a large force thrown out on his right, with intent to cut him
off, he fell back upon the main body. The position of the enemy thus
disclosed was as follows: Colonel Williams’ regiment was behind a ridge
at the head of the gorge, and on the right of the road, so that his fire
commanded the gorge and road for a half-mile. Colonel Trigg’s regiment,
the Fourth Virginia, was on the crest of the crescent-shaped hill on the
left of the road, commanding it by their flanking fire. The artillery
was between the two at the forks of the creek and the turn in the road
and gorge. The evident design of the enemy was to draw the Unionists up
the road in front of their cannon and between the cross-fire of the
three regiments, but this well-formed plan failed in its execution, as
in their impotence or nervousness they neglected to reserve their fire
for the approach of the main body. The remainder of their force were in
the rear of their cannon, in a strong supporting position. Occupying
Graveyard Point, the end of a high ridge on the right of the creek north
of his main body, Colonel Garfield dispatched a hundred men across the
creek to ascend the horn of the crescent farthest up the gorge. The
ascent was most difficult, the men being compelled to creep on their
hands and knees most of the way. On attaining the summit, they were
greeted with the whole fire of Trigg’s regiment, stationed at the base,
and deployed along the other horn; also by a fire from the artillery and
the reserve in the rear. On the top of the ridge, and at points nearly
equi-distant from each other, were three piles of stone, the possession
of which was eagerly sought for by the contending parties.

The small band on the summit of the ridge were now reinforced by two
hundred men, and assisted by the reserve at Graveyard Point, who poured
a galling fire on the deployed right flank of the enemy, they soon drove
him from the first stone pile, and took possession of it.

A force of two hundred men was then thrown out by Colonel Garfield for
the ascent of the lower horn of the crescent. These soon reached the
summit, where being reinforced by Colonel Craner of the Fortieth with
three hundred men, they captured the third stone pile, while the rebels
were thus confined to the second or central one. The fire was now
exceedingly heavy. Both parties betook themselves to the shelter of the
rocks and trees, and the battle raged furiously, the shots tearing
through the branches and surging up the defiles of the mountains in a
wild tumult of sounds.

About half-past four a burst of loud cheering heralded in reinforcements
for the Union troops. A detachment of brave soldiers came in
simultaneously with the shouts that welcomed them, panting, and almost
breathless from the fatigue of a long march; for fifteen miles they had
struggled through the mud of a broken road without breakfast, and at a
tiresome pace. Excited by the sound of the conflict, they had marched
the last two miles on the double-quick, and came in bathed with
perspiration, bespattered with mud, and half the men carrying their
coats on their arms.

Though fatigued with the forced march, and faint with hunger, these
noble fellows demanded only to be led at once into battle. After a short
rest, they were thrown across the creek to ascend the right horn of the
crescent, but were finally ordered back, as it had now become too dark
to advance with safety, and the storm of battle, by mutual consent,
ceased. Resting upon their arms, determined to renew the battle in the
morning, the Union troops spent the night; but when morning dawned, the
enemy, it was found, had vanished. Under cover of the darkness he had
burned his heavy baggage and retreated. He left twenty-seven dead on the
field, and it is definitely ascertained had some one hundred and
twenty-five wounded, of whom forty-two subsequently died. The Federals
lost two killed and twenty-five wounded.

The Richmond papers claimed a brilliant Confederate victory on this
occasion, estimating the Federal forces at 8,000 men, and their loss at
400 killed and wounded.




                      BATTLE OF SILVER CREEK, MO.

                            JANUARY 8, 1862.


It was the misfortune of Missouri, more than any other State, to be a
battle-ground for the guerrilla forces of the rebels, and for the
skirmishing engagements of the war. These minor battles, while they had
but little effect on the great result, inflicted untold horrors on the
people dwelling there.

At the opening of the year 1862, General Pope had command of the
North-western District of the State, with his headquarters at
Otterville, Cooper county.

Having heard that the enemy was busily engaged in recruiting men in
Roanoke and adjoining counties, Major W. M. G. Torrence of the First
Iowa Cavalry was ordered to concentrate and take command of several
small bodies of Federal troops, then guarding important points in the
district, and to break up the rebel encampments.

From Booneville, Major Torrence proceeded to Fayette, Howard county, and
for several days was actively engaged in scouring the country and
endeavoring to ascertain the position and strength of the rebel forces.
He found that Colonel Poindexter was recruiting in various places in the
county, and that he was encamped with his principal force, of from five
to seven hundred men, on Silver Creek, and had other camps to reinforce
him when ready to move, to the number of from twelve to fifteen hundred
men.

They further reported that he had pledged himself to his men that he
would _clean out_ the Federals in the county of Howard in a very few
days. Night after night was selected to surprise the Union camp with his
whole force, but through some mishap they never appeared. On the morning
of January 8th, all was in motion in the Federal camp, under orders from
Major Torrence to hold themselves in readiness to move with all their
able-bodied men at an early hour. They took up their line of march for
Roanoke, and, after moving a few miles, were joined by Major Hubbard’s
command. The forces now comprised a portion of Merrill’s horse, under
Major Hunt, one company of the Fourth Ohio, under Captain Foster, a part
of the Missouri First, under Major Hubbard, and four companies of the
First Iowa, under Major Torrence. After passing the town of Roanoke, the
whole column moved rapidly about five miles, and halted to have position
and duties assigned to the several commands. Learning that the enemy
were in a strong position on the Creek, where it probably would be
impossible to charge them with mounted men, it was determined to
dismount and fight as infantry.

Captain Foster was assigned the advance, followed by Merrill’s Horse and
the Missouri First, all armed with carbines. The First Iowa were to make
a descent upon the camp with drawn sabers, and if impossible to make a
charge mounted, they were to dismount and move on foot. Lieutenant
Dustin, of the First Iowa, with ten men, formed the advance guard. All
being in readiness, they moved forward very rapidly, and followed the
tortuous windings of a road leading through narrow lanes and thick
timber, till the sharp crack of a rifle warned them that they were upon
the rebel pickets. This was the signal to rush forward, which was done.
On, on they pushed, through underbrush and defiles, till the advanced
guard rushed to the entrance of their camp, and found the enemy drawn up
in line of battle. It was now found that the thick timber and underbrush
forbade a charge upon the camp. The order to dismount passed along the
lines, and a column of armed infantry emerged from the lines on the
roadside, ready for the onset. The battle now commenced in earnest, and
volley after volley of musketry told that the work of death had begun.

The enemy rushed from their line of battle, after their second volley,
into the intrenchment formed by the creek, and behind trees, logs, etc.,
opened fire upon the Union lines, which was promptly answered by their
forces, armed with carbines, by a continued fire. Major Torrence now
ordered his men forward with revolver and sabre, to make a charge on the
camp; and with a yell running wildly along their lines they advanced, in
the face of the enemy’s fire, and rushed into their camp. So great was
the eagerness to move forward, that three companies claimed the honor of
being first in camp.

The enemy now gave way tumultuously, and ran from their camp, leaving
guns, horses, camp equipage, powder, and a large quantity of new
clothing for men in Price’s army. It was a complete rout, as the
appearance of the camp fully attested. It was now nearly dark, with a
heavy fog, and fearing that the enemy had only retired as a ruse to
rally and come to the attack again, the order was given to destroy the
whole camp and equipage. The work of destruction was soon
complete—wagons, saddles, tents, blankets, clothing, etc., were gathered
up, flung on the fires, and soon became one heap of burning ruins. The
Federals now looked up their dead and wounded, and cared for them. The
enemy’s dead lay in all portions of the camp, and the groans of their
dying mingled with the exultant shouts of the victors. It was a fearful
struggle, as the soldiers all knew that they never could retreat, and it
was victory or death to them. The cool courage and gallant bearing of
the officers in command, were worthy of Americans.

The loss of the enemy was 12 killed, 22 wounded and 15 prisoners. That
of the Federals 3 killed and 10 wounded.

[Illustration: ]




           BATTLE OF MILL SPRING, AT LOGAN’S CROSS-ROADS, KY.

                       SUNDAY, JANUARY 19, 1862.


This battle was the first of the series of splendid triumphs that
occurred early in the year 1862, which resulted in severe losses to the
rebel armies of the West, both in men and material. It was the first
breach in their well-planned line of defence, by which the right wing of
the Confederate army of the West was broken, and their great stronghold
at Bowling Green, the centre of their operations, laid open to the
advancing army of the Union.

After the discomfiture of Zollicoffer in his attack on the camp of
General Schoepf, at Camp Wildcat, on the 21st of October, he left two
regiments to defend the post at Cumberland Gap, and occupied a position
on the Cumberland river, opposite Mill Spring, at the mouth of White Oak
Creek. Here he was engaged in fortifying this most advantageous natural
position, and in recruiting and organizing an army, which was now
formidable in numbers, and whose frequent forays had rendered his name a
terror to the loyal inhabitants of that region.

The rebel stronghold was familiarly known among the inhabitants as
“Zollicoffer’s Den.” It was situated on the north bank of the
Cumberland, where it is intersected by White Oak Creek. The country for
two miles from the river is entirely clear, and broken into hills of
imposing altitude. Six of these hills, forming a picturesque range,
commanded each other and the entire approach to the camp for miles
around. On these hills Zollicoffer had raised breastworks and redoubts.
The south side of the river, commanding the entire camp, was also well
fortified.

On the 6th of January the rebel Major-General George B. Crittenden,
commanding the division to which Zollicoffer’s brigade was attached,
arrived at Mill Spring, and established his headquarters. He brought to
his position three Tennessee and one Mississippi regiment, and was
afterwards reinforced by three regiments from Bowling Green, and still
more recently by some fifteen hundred Virginia troops from Knoxville.
This gave him, all told, over ten thousand men. A very effective portion
of his force was a body of cavalry, from two thousand to three thousand
strong, in which he was superior to General Thomas, but which was of no
service to him in the engagement.

General Buell, the Federal commander in Kentucky, having now at his
disposal a competent army to commence offensive operations, ordered
General Thomas to advance with his division against General Crittenden’s
position at Mill Spring. With two brigades under his command General
Thomas broke up camp near Lebanon and marched, by way of Columbia,
toward the rebel stronghold. On Thursday, the 16th of January, the Ninth
Ohio (German), Colonel McCook, brother of the General in command at
Mumfordsville, the Second Minnesota, Colonel Van Clear; Tenth Indiana,
Colonel Manson; Fourth Kentucky, Colonel (formerly Judge) Fry of
Danville, and Colonel Wolford’s Kentucky Cavalry, and one battery, with
General Thomas and staff, arrived after a most fatiguing march of many
days. They came in incessant rain, over horrid roads, via Jamestown, at
a point about eight miles south-west of Somerset, on the road leading to
Hart’s Ford, and the rebel intrenchments, and pitched their tents near a
fork of country roads, upon what is known all through that section as
“Logan’s place,” a very extensive plantation of several thousand acres.
On Friday, the Fourteenth Ohio, Colonel Stedman, and the Tenth Kentucky,
Colonel Harlan, three detached companies of the First regiment of
Michigan Engineers and Mechanics, and an Ohio battery, reached within
eight miles north-west of the position of General Thomas. After
undergoing indescribable hardships in making their way on a direct line,
through the wild, rugged, heavily-timbered, and almost untravelled
country intervening between that point and Columbia—(they had to
construct a road as they went)—they encamped there.

General Schoepf’s command was stationed at the time the above seven and
a half regiments arrived at a short distance south-west of Somerset. It
comprised the Seventeenth, Thirty-first, Thirty-fifth and Thirty-eighth
Ohio, the Twelfth Kentucky, Colonel Haskins, the First and Second
Tennessee regiments, some companies of cavalry, and two batteries. On
Saturday morning, in accordance with orders received the previous
evening, that part of General Schoepf’s command constituting General
Carter’s brigade, consisting of the Twelfth Kentucky, the First and
Second Tennessee, and Captain W. E. Standart’s battery, left their
camps, with twenty-four hours’ rations, and proceeded five miles on the
Columbia road to Fishing Creek, where they halted, awaiting further
orders. At five o’clock they were ordered to join General Thomas’ main
body at Logan’s Place. In crossing the swollen creek the water reached
to the waists of the men. Owing to the wretched condition of the road,
they did not reach their point of destination until midnight.

Simultaneously with the above, three regiments and a battery, the
balance of General Schoepf’s command, with the exception of the
Thirty-eighth Ohio, advanced over another road leading out from Somerset
in a south-easterly direction to Fishing Creek, which they found risen
so high as to render it almost impossible to cross. After much exertion,
a rope was finally stretched across, holding on to which the men slowly
managed to get over. At nightfall only one regiment, however, had landed
on the other side, and while the remainder were crossing on the morning
of the battle, orders came from General Thomas that their assistance was
no longer needed, and the brigade retraced their steps to Somerset.

During this time a heavy storm came on, and torrents of rain continued
to pour upon the devoted troops. General Thomas’ immediate command was
tolerably well protected; but General Carter’s brigade had started
without tents, and hence were completely exposed to the drenching rain
and chilling wind. Every man in the brigade was soaked to the skin
before Logan’s Place was reached, and during the remainder of Saturday
night the poor fellows lay on the wet ground sheltered only by the
dripping woods.

On the morning of the fight the regiments posted on Logan’s farm were
distributed as follows: on the right of the road to Hart’s Ford, facing
toward the river, were the Ninth Ohio and Second Minnesota; directly
opposite them, on the left, lay General Carter’s brigade; three-quarters
of a mile south-east of it were the Fourth Kentucky, Tenth Indiana, and
two batteries—the Tenth Indiana occupying the most advanced position. In
front of the last mentioned regiment were encamped about one hundred and
twenty of Wolford’s Cavalry, the balance of the regiment being off on
escort duty; about two and a half miles further south was the outmost
Union picket—twenty of Wolford’s cavalry, the Fourteenth Ohio and Tenth
Kentucky being still encamped eight miles to the north-east. It is thus
seen that the Federal force advanced upon by the rebels included no more
than seven infantry regiments, the detached Michigan companies, one
hundred and forty cavalry, and two batteries.

The main characteristics of the battle-ground are steep, bluff-like
hills, and abrupt narrow ravines. The only comparative levels are formed
by the undulating ridges of the former. Logan’s Place extends over one
of the most extensive of these, and, with its large cleared fields,
afforded the best field for a battle that could have been found in many
miles around. The whole country is covered with a thick growth of
timber, except where the husbandman had cleared it away. The roads were
but a succession of rugged little hills, tiring to the footman and
taxing the wagoner’s skill to the utmost in the best weather.

According to the statements of persons subsequently captured,
Zollicoffer’s original force did not exceed six thousand in number,
which had been increased to ten thousand, comprising ten regiments of
infantry, about three thousand cavalry, and fifteen pieces of artillery.
On Saturday morning information was brought to General Crittenden by
secession sympathizers, living near Somerset, of the proposed movement
of General Carter’s brigade. The rebel commander had learned that
General Thomas’ division was on the march to Somerset, but was not aware
that it had already arrived; and supposing that General Carter’s command
was merely setting out for scouting purposes, conceived a plan of
falling upon it with his whole force. The plan being communicated to
Zollicoffer, he strenuously objected to any demonstration outside of
their intrenchments. His superior, however, insisted upon the
project—bold and creditable enough, if not based upon wrong premises—and
hence the whole rebel army moved out of the fortifications shortly after
dark. Owing to the difficulty of working their artillery ahead, it took
them until 3 A. M. to come within one mile of the Union pickets. Here
they halted and rested, in a deluge of rain. At six o’clock they renewed
their march, and their cavalry advance guard came up with Wolford’s men.
Supposing them to be only a foraging party, the Union dragoons attacked
and drove them back. Perceiving, however, masses of infantry down the
road, they sent word to General Thomas, and then retreated to their
camp. The squadron was quickly mounted and rode towards the enemy; but,
discovering his overwhelming strength, fell back, dismounted, and joined
the Tenth Indiana, and afterwards actively participated in the fight.

Companies K and I, of the Tenth Indiana, Captains Shorter and Perkins,
were detailed as pickets in advance of their regiment, and were first
attacked by the advancing rebels at half-past six o’clock, and with the
assistance of Company A, Captain Hamilton, all under Major Miller,
gallantly held the enemy in check, until supported by the remainder of
the regiment.

In twenty minutes after General Thomas was apprised of the approach of
the enemy, his whole force was under arms, and eagerly awaiting the
onset. The Tenth Indiana, Second Minnesota and the dismounted cavalry
pushed forward a short distance from their encampment in an open field
to a piece of timber, and the Fourth Kentucky took a position in the
woods on the left. The Tenth Indiana having the lead, was within musket
range of the rebels just before eight o’clock, and now the battle fairly
commenced.

At least six regiments formed the rebel right, and pressed first on the
Tenth Indiana; but this brave regiment had learned the fighting metal of
the enemy at Rich Mountain, in Western Virginia, and could not be made
to yield an inch even to such fearful odds. Fortunately protected
somewhat by the trees from the hostile fire, they stood steadily,
pouring volley after volley into the rebels; responding to their yells
with defiant cheers; fighting four times their number for nearly an hour
and a half, and never yielding an inch, in spite of a constant and
fearful hail of lead, until their ammunition became exhausted; when they
were ordered to give way to the Second Minnesota. This they did with
composed and unbroken ranks, bringing off their dead and wounded, whose
number was a mournful proof of the fearful trial they had undergone.

Some thirty minutes after the Tenth Indiana had opened the contest, the
Fourth Kentucky engaged the rebels on the left of the former, and
displayed coolness and firmness most remarkable, in view of the fact
that it had never before been under fire. It also had to contend against
superior numbers, but maintained its formation, and did not allow the
rebels to gain a foot of ground. The men cheered each other, and in
their ardor came within short range of the enemy, to whose irregular
fire they replied with great vigor and effect. Colonel Fry inspired all
under him by his courageous conduct. Up and down the line of his command
he moved, urging his Kentuckians on under a shower of bullets.

Meantime, the Second Minnesota fulfilled the trust left to it by the
Tenth Indiana. The stalwart farmers and lumbermen that composed it
performed the duty allotted to them deliberately and with perfect
success. They loaded and fired with ease and calmness, and seemed to
think no more of the work they were doing than of handling a plow or
plying an axe.

The widely-renowned Ninth Ohio did not join in the bloody strife in its
earliest stages. At about half-past eight, however, its impatience for
the fray was at last gratified, and it appeared upon the stage in solid
line of battle, moving measuredly, and with the confident and determined
air of veterans, through a broad, open field on the right of the road,
to within two hundred yards, and began a fire upon some rebel regiments
that were firing from behind a fence, with regularity and precision. It
held the right alone while the action continued.

The rebels succeeded in bringing a battery of their artillery in
position about nine o’clock, and opened upon the Federal troops shortly
afterward with solid and hollow shot. Their balls and shells all went
high over the Union soldiers, not one of whom owed his death or wound to
the rebel artillery.

Captains Kinney’s, Standart’s, and Whetmore’s Ohio batteries were
brought into position, and rendered effective service whenever an
opportunity offered. In the heat of the engagement Captain Kinney
ordered one section of his battery within sixty yards of the enemy’s
line, and opened a deadly fire upon them, which added greatly to the
success of the day.

The battle was now at its height, and the effect of the artillery,
roaring through the conflict, with the crash of shells and sharp whistle
of bullets, was increased by a storm that had broken out in the morning,
and now poured a deluge of rain on the combatants. For a time, the
lightning of heaven vied in sharpness with the flash of artillery, and
rolling bursts of thunder went booming over the mountains, giving
terrible effect to the whole scene.

[Illustration:

  BATTLE OF MILL SPRING.
]

Amid this storm, the opposing lines of battle were several times carried
so close to each other that the fight was urged on with a hand-to-hand
encounter, and the commanders on both sides came in dangerous contiguity
with the foe.

Up to eleven o’clock, the fighting was confined almost entirely to an
exchange of lead and iron. The Union right and left would advance on the
enemy, fire, and fall back. Then the Secession forces would advance,
exchange shots, each side holding its own ground and no more.

The Fourteenth Ohio and Tenth Kentucky, sent for as soon as the alarm
had been given, being reported to General Thomas coming up with their
battery from their encampment on the Columbus road, on a full run, he at
last determined to bring matters to an issue. He directed General Carter
to flank the enemy’s right with his regiments, which had been restive
all the morning under the necessity of remaining idle spectators.

But before this movement could be made, the heroes of the Ninth Ohio had
already decided the battle. Colonel McCook (by the way the only American
in the regiment) had his horse shot under him, and was himself wounded,
but nevertheless continued in command. About eleven the patience of the
regiment became exhausted, and the Colonel gave the order to advance. It
was received with a hurrah. Steadily and compactly the column moved over
the two hundred yards separating it from the enemy. When within thirty
yards of the foe the order was given to “charge bayonets,” and in an
instant the moving human wall bristled with bayonets and pressed forward
in quick step. The rebels looked aghast at a sight they had never
witnessed before. A Tennessee regiment on their extreme left fired a
random volley and broke. A Mississippi regiment—the same that held the
fence already mentioned—hesitated a few moments longer. But the
triumphant shout from the Germans, and the bristling array of pointed
steel was too much for them. In an instant, those of the enemy between
the fence and the Federals, with the exception of a few, who were
bayoneted, had scrambled over and fled in wild disorder.

Colonel S. S. Fry, of the Fourth Kentucky, was in the act of leading his
regiment into a charge upon the Mississippians, when General
Zollicoffer, accompanied by his aid, rode up to him and said, “You are
not going to fight your friends, are you? These men (pointing to the
Mississippians) are all your friends.” In the mean time Zollicoffer’s
aid fired upon Colonel Fry, wounding his horse, from which wound the
animal died. Colonel Fry then turned and fired upon Zollicoffer, with
fatal effect. General Z. evidently labored under the impression that
Colonel Fry was a rebel officer. They had never met before, nor did
Colonel Fry know the position of the officer upon whom he fired, as the
evidences of his rank were covered by a cloak which General Zollicoffer
wore in battle.

From this moment the battle was won. The rebels in front of the Union
left had grown dispirited by the news of Zollicoffer’s fall, and their
fire was slackening. When they saw the breaking of their left wing, they
faltered and commenced retreating. The Tenth Kentucky, Fourteenth
Indiana, and two batteries were immediately pushed after them. But the
speed of the enemy increased, and although the Union troops followed in
quick step, they could only manage to come within range of his rear, to
which they gave from time to time parting salutes with rifle balls and
shells. The pursuit was continued to within a mile of the intrenchments,
when owing to the close approach of night, the victors stopped and made
themselves as comfortable as possible on the northern declivity of a
hill overlooking the fortifications.

Rain was still falling, and although all were greatly fatigued from the
labors of the day, but few sought repose on the soaked ground. The
excitement of the battle kept the majority awake, and the uncomfortable
night was spent in the discussion of the stirring events of the
preceding hours, by the immense camp-fires, which burned brightly in
defiance of the drifting rain.

With daybreak some of the Federal guns were got into a position
commanding the rebel intrenchments, and were soon hurling shells upon
them. Crowds of the enemy were seen hurrying down the hill toward the
landing, and the little ferry-boat was rapidly steaming to and fro,
carrying bodies of men, the last of the Confederates on the right bank
of the river. No response being elicited, the infantry was ordered
forward, the Tenth Kentucky in the advance. With lusty cheers the troops
rushed down the road and up the hills crowned by fortifications, and
climbing over the barricades of logs, obstructing the approaches on all
sides, the Kentuckians were in a few minutes on the parapet, shouting,
jumping, and waving their hats and muskets. Hardly five minutes more
elapsed when the rebel camp teemed with thousands of soldiers, frantic
with excitement.

The rebels literally saved nothing but what they wore on their persons.
Eight of their guns, including two Parrot 20-pounders, with caissons and
ammunition, were left behind, together with nearly a thousand stand of
arms, and hundreds of boxes of cartridges, 1,700 horses and mules, a
drove of cattle, 100 wagons, with harness, vast quantities of commissary
and quartermasters’ stores, some twenty bales of blankets and quilts,
and the personal effects of officers and men.

The enemy left all their dead and many of their wounded behind them,
five of their surgeons, however, remaining. One hundred and fifteen of
their killed, including Zollicoffer, and about 120 of their wounded were
found on the field, and 150 prisoners taken. Their entire loss must have
been much greater. The Federal loss was 39 killed and 207 wounded.

Taken as a whole it was one of the fairest contested battles and most
glorious victories of the war—one in which the Western troops fully
sustained their reputation for unflinching courage and stern
determination never to yield, no matter how great the force opposed to
them.




                    INVESTMENT OF FORT PULASKI, GA.

                          _January 27, 1862._


Tybee Island, lying at the mouth of Savannah river, immediately below
Fort Pulaski, on Cockspur Island, was occupied by Federal troops very
shortly after the capture of Port Royal by Commodore Dupont, the
Flag-officer of the South Atlantic blockading squadron. It was late in
December, however, before a garrison was established there. This was the
first step toward the investment of Fort Pulaski, whose heavy embrasures
frowned in stern defiance at the Federal fleet investing the harbor.

Late in December, from his headquarters at Tybee Island, an island
forming the eastern shore of Calibogue Sound, and lying north of
Savannah harbor, General Sherman, commanding the army in this district,
had dispatched several reconnoitering parties to explore the small
rivers, creeks and inlets which intersect each other at various points
on the left of the Savannah river, forming the series of islands which
dot the map of the harbor. A well grounded hope was entertained that an
inside channel would be discovered, connecting with the Savannah river,
of sufficient depth to float the gunboats to a point on that river far
above Fort Pulaski.

In order to understand the nature of the reconnoissance, it will be
necessary to have a clear apprehension of the geography of the country.
Savannah is about fifteen miles from the mouth of the river, and on the
right or southern bank. Approach to it by water is defended by Fort
Pulaski, a casemated fort on Cockspur Island, at the mouth of the river,
and Fort Jackson, a barbette fort on the mainland, only four miles below
the city. The left bank is formed by a succession of islands, and the
channel also is interrupted by large and numerous islands, the most
important of which is Elba, whose upper extremity is immediately
opposite Fort Jackson. Lower down in the stream is Long Island. The
network of creeks and bays that surrounds Hilton Head terminates
southward in Calibogue sound, which is divided from the Savannah river
at its mouth by Turtle and Jones Island. The waters that form two sides
of Jones Island, which is triangular in shape, are called Mud and Wright
rivers; the latter is the southernmost, and separates Jones from Turtle
Island, which lies next to Dawfuskie Island, the western shore of
Calibogue sound. The islands on the Savannah are all very low and
marshy, overgrown by high grass, and frequently without a solitary shrub
or tree; they are all liable to be submerged by a very high tide. Jones
Island is a broad, marshy, uninhabited island, five miles above the
fort, not more than five miles long, by two or three broad. About half
way between its upper and lower angles, and fronting on the Savannah, is
Venus Point.

This first reconnoissance was undertaken by Lieutenant J. H. Wilson, of
the topographical engineers. Taking with him two boats and a company of
Rhode Island soldiers, together with his negro oarsmen and pilots, he
started on the dangerous expedition, making all the necessary
explorations by night, while his boats were hidden by the tall grass on
the marshy and swampy shores he traversed. To the rear of Jones Island
he discovered a canal called Wall’s Cut, connecting the Mud and Wright
rivers, the former emptying into the Savannah six, and the latter two
miles above Fort Pulaski. The navigation of Wall’s Cut had been
obstructed by three rows of piles, driven across its entire width by the
rebels, but at high tide the boats were got over these obstructions, and
soon after floated on the waters of the Savannah, at night, unobserved
by the rebels. The feasibility of traversing this route with the
gunboats had been demonstrated, but the movement was betrayed to the
rebels before the plan could be consummated.

A reconnoissance in force, through a corresponding series of channels on
the right of the Savannah river, was then determined on, and Captain C.
H. Davis was dispatched with the gunboats Ottawa, Lieutenant-Commanding
Stevens; Seneca, Ammen; and the steamers Isaac Smith, Nicholson;
Potomska, Watmough; Ellen, Budd; Western World, Gregory; in company with
the transports Cosmopolitan, Delaware and Boston, having on board the
Sixth Connecticut, Fourth New Hampshire, Ninety-seventh Pennsylvania; in
all twenty-four hundred men, commanded by Brigadier-General H. G.
Wright. Commander C. R. P. Rodgers accompanied the expedition.

Captain Davis sailed from Port Royal harbor on the 26th of January, and
anchored in Warsaw Sound the same evening. The next morning he entered
the Little Tybee river, or Freeborn Cut, and at half-past one passed up
that river above Fort Pulaski, and within long range of the rebel guns,
but was unmolested, as they were not prepared for an enemy on that side.
After passing the high land on Wilmington Island, the principal one on
their route, they were arrested by a heavy double row of piles, driven
across the channel. The island was now carefully explored, and found to
have been deserted. The launches were also dispatched to examine the
numerous creeks leading to the river, and to explore the main stream. At
five o’clock five rebel steamers made their appearance in the Savannah
river to reconnoitre the proceedings of the Federal fleet. At this hour
Captain Ammen made his way through the marsh and cut the telegraph wire
communicating with Fort Pulaski.

Captain John Wright, who had been dispatched by Flag-officer Dupont with
a number of gunboats up the Wright river on the left of the Savannah, by
the route previously explored, made his appearance on Tuesday, the 28th,
and by means of the new army signals communication was opened between
the two fleets. At eleven o’clock, the rebel steamers again made their
appearance in the Savannah, and attempted to pass below the fort, when a
spirited engagement commenced between them and the two Federal fleets.
Three of the rebel steamers succeeded in passing, but the other two were
driven back disabled.

The attempt to reach the Savannah river with the gunboats having been
abandoned, measures were undertaken to blockade the river, and interrupt
communication between Fort Pulaski and Savannah, by land approaches, and
the establishment of batteries on the banks of the river. It was
resolved to erect a battery on Jones Island, the rear of which could be
reached by the national flotilla. The first attempt was made on the
night of February 7th, but owing to storms and other causes, it was not
successful. A few days after, General Sherman issued orders for a second
expedition to Jones Island, and, if practicable, erect a battery there,
so as to command the Savannah river. This was to be done without the
assistance of the naval forces.

The expedition was placed under the command of Brigadier-General Viele,
and consisted of the Forty-eighth New York Volunteers, Colonel Perry,
two companies of volunteer engineers, and two companies of the Third
Rhode Island artillery. The troops, with six large guns, (thirty-two
pounders,) were embarked in flatboats at Dawfuskie Island, and in tow of
light-draught steamboats. The expedition reached Jones Island, a
preliminary reconnoissance was made of all the points on the island, and
a site at Venus Point was selected for the erection of a fortification.
The swampy character of the soil seemed to forbid the landing of troops
on the island, much more to erect batteries and mount heavy guns
thereon. It was determined, however, to erect the battery at the point
already designated, and to carry the guns a distance of a mile through
the swamp. To facilitate matters, Colonel Perry undertook the
construction of a corduroy road from the place where the troops landed
on the Mud river side of Jones Island to Venus Point. The road was
constructed, and by the untiring labor of the troops, the guns were at
last placed in battery.

While the construction of the road was going on, another detachment of
Colonel Perry’s regiment attempted to erect breastworks to cover the
guns. The mud, as fast as it was piled up for the battery, slipped and
sunk away; but the platforms were laid and the guns mounted. The guns
were landed on a wharf made of bags filled with sand, and long planks
laid across them. Tramways were laid along the marsh, constructed of
planks thirty feet long, placed in parallel lines; two sets of these
parallels were used for each gun, and as fast as the pieces were taken
over one set, it was taken up and placed still further in advance. Holes
were drilled in the planks, and ropes looped through the holes, so that
the planks might be more easily dragged by the troops. In this manner
the guns were conveyed across Jones Island to the chosen position.
Colonel Perry, Lieutenant J. H. Wilson, of the United States Engineers,
and Lieutenant Horace Porter, of the Ordnance Department, superintended
the removal of the guns. On the first night the heavy guns were dragged
two hundred yards. The second night the work proceeded, and the guns
were dragged the remainder of the route, and before morning all were in
position. The work of tugging the guns was performed entirely by the
Forty-eighth New York regiment, commanded by Colonel Perry. In the
morning a rebel gunboat came down the river to reconnoitre, and
doubtless was amazed to find the Federal fort confronting her; but by
hugging the western shore she was enabled to pass the guns on Jones
Island without serious injury. This demonstrated the necessity of
another battery on the west end of Bird Island, in the middle of the
river opposite, which was subsequently erected, and the river thus
effectually blockaded. On the 15th, four rebel gunboats attacked the
batteries on Venus Point, Jones Island, but were all driven back, and
one of them disabled.

By the erection of these batteries Fort Pulaski was cut off from all
supplies and reinforcements; and General Hunter now commenced the
erection of batteries for the reduction of the fort.




                        NEW MEXICO AND ARIZONA.


The comprehensive scheme of the rebel leaders was not confined to the
mere occupancy of the Cotton States, or the entire section of the Union
south of the Ohio river, but included within its future all the vast
domain west of the Mississippi and south of Kansas. The restoration of
peace, and the independence of the Southern Confederacy, would then
enable it to carry its victorious arms into Mexico, and a vast empire
would be erected, subject to the control of the Confederate government.
In order to accomplish these purposes with the greatest promptitude, it
was determined to take possession of New Mexico and Arizona at an early
day, and bodies of armed men were dispatched from Texas upon this
errand.

They reached the Territories during the month of July, 1861; one portion
of the invading force entering Arizona, and the other took their line of
march toward Santa Fé, in New Mexico, under the command of
Brigadier-General H. H. Sibley. There was no military organization of
the _inhabitants_ of either New Mexico or Arizona to favor the rebel
cause, excepting, perhaps a very few recent emigrants from Texas or
other Southern States, who joined the invading forces—the _natives_ were
for the most part loyal.

Fort Fillmore, then under command of Major Lynde, of the United States
army, who had seven hundred regulars for its defence, was surrendered or
betrayed on August 2d, to a force of Texan troops inferior to his own.
The men were paroled, and finally brought to the east, where they were
stationed by the Government at various posts on the northern lakes.
Subsequently Forts Davis, Bliss and Stanton were easily captured by the
rebel chieftains. The want of military organization among the people,
their unprotected towns, and the scarcity of arms, prevented any
effective resistance, and they were compelled to submit to the invasion,
while waiting anxiously for the relief which they felt assured the
Government would send.

At length the Governor of New Mexico, Henry Connelly, issued a vigorous
and stirring proclamation, on the 9th of September, calling upon the
citizens to enrol themselves for the defence of their homes against the
invaders, who were coming to subdue them to the rule of the Texan
authorities. He ordered an organization of the militia in the several
counties of the State, and the Adjutant-General was instructed to carry
the orders into effect.

On the 9th of November, New Mexico was constituted a military
department, and Colonel E. R. S. Canby, of the United States army, was
appointed to the command. Colonel Canby immediately entered upon his
duties, and pushed his work with so much energy, that by the end of
December he had retaken Forts Craig and Stanton. Federal forces also
held Fort Massachusetts to the north, and Fort Union, on the south-east
of Santa Fé, the capital of the Territory.

On the 2d of December, the Legislature assembled, and the Governor
recommended the adoption of measures to secure the loyal adhesion of
such of the Indian tribes as had not been betrayed into the hands of the
Confederate agents. While loyal to the Government in their sentiments,
they found themselves apparently cut off from its protection and
support, under the circumstances in which they were placed; and pressed
on all sides, they were somewhat divided. While some remained loyal, and
were willing to enlist in the Federal service, others joined the
Confederates; but the great body desired to pursue a course which would
be entirely neutral.

On the 30th of December, General Sibley, the rebel commander, issued a
proclamation from his headquarters, notifying the people that he took
possession of New Mexico in behalf of, and for the benefit of the
Confederate States. He declared, that “by geographical position, by
similarity of institutions, by commercial interests, and by future
destinies, New Mexico pertains to the Confederacy.” General Sibley also
declared the United States tax laws abolished.




                          BATTLE OF VALVENDE.

                           FEBRUARY 21, 1862.


Colonel Canby had no intention of remaining inactive while the rebel
leader was thus earnestly endeavoring to persuade the people into
willing submission to Confederate power, or of permitting him by an
apparent triumph to exercise his authority for the subversion of the
legitimate government. He accordingly prepared for the important
business of expelling him from the territory, determined to accomplish
this, whatever effort it might involve. The rebels, on their way through
the territory, followed the valley of the Rio Grande, and consequently
would be obliged to pass Fort Craig. At this place Colonel Canby
resolved to dispute their advance. His force was composed in part of
United States regulars, and in part of New Mexican volunteers. With
these he descended the river to meet the invaders. They were informed of
his approach, and on the 19th crossed the river in order to take a
position on the other side, from which they could shell the fort, and
obtain command of the stream above it, by which movement they could cut
off his communications. On the afternoon of the 19th, Colonel Canby
ordered the detachments of the Fifth, Seventh and Tenth United States
Infantry, under Captains Selden and Wingate, and Colonels Carson’s and
Pino’s regiments of volunteers to cross the river and occupy an
elevation opposite the fort, which would otherwise be appropriated by
the rebels. On the afternoon of the 20th, Captain McRae’s battery and
the cavalry under Major Duncan were ordered to cross the river, and were
brought into position. The enemy were thus cut off from the river, and
suffered from want of water. Their mules were so much exhausted that it
was found necessary to double the teams in order to draw the wagons; but
this resort at last failed, and the animals gave out entirely. The
rebels finding the desperate strait to which they were reduced, opened a
heavy cannonade upon the Federal troops. Being protected by the
elevations between them and the enemy, the Union troops suffered no
injury, except one man, who was wounded by a fragment from a ball, which
struck a rock, and was shattered by the blow. The night closed on the
antagonists. About two hundred mules were captured by the Union scouts,
and a number of wagons burned.

On the morning of the 21st, at about eight o’clock, Colonel Canby
ordered Colonel Roberts, with his cavalry, Colonel Valdez’s cavalry,
Colonel Carson’s volunteers, the regular infantry, and Captain McRae’s
and Lieutenant Hall’s batteries to proceed up the west bank of the Rio
Grande, and prevent the Texans from reaching the water, at the only
point where the river was fordable by the sloping banks. This position
was seven miles north of the fort, and when Colonel Roberts’ command
reached it, he found that the enemy had gained the water first. Colonel
Roberts immediately opened his batteries upon them, on which they
retreated with a loss of twenty-five or thirty killed, and one cannon.
The gun was dismounted, spiked, and rendered unfit for use. Colonel
Roberts then crossed the river, and held his position until the issue of
the battle was decided.

After one o’clock Colonel Canby came upon the ground with his staff,
followed by Colonel Pino’s regiment of volunteers, and took the command
in person. Up to this time the fighting had been principally with the
batteries. Captain McRae’s battery occupied the left, and Lieutenant
Hall’s battery the right of the line. On the left flank, and within
about a hundred yards of McRae’s battery, was a piece of woods, where
bodies of the enemy were seen to collect, but out of range of the guns.
Two companies of regulars and two companies of volunteers were assigned
to support this battery. Lieutenant Hall’s guns were to be supported by
the cavalry and Colonel Carson’s volunteers.

Thus disposed, Colonel Canby intended to make an advance, when suddenly
a brisk fire of musketry was opened towards the right of the field. This
was entirely unexpected, but the object was soon discovered to be a ruse
to divert attention from an attempt which was immediately made to take
the batteries. Advancing to the front, in two divisions, the enemy
rushed on and made their charges against the batteries in the most
determined and gallant manner. The charge against Lieutenant Hall’s
battery was made by the cavalry, who dashed forward with an unbroken
front, in the face of the destructive fire to which they were exposed.
Standing true to their posts, the experienced gunners worked their
pieces with such deadly effect, that the enemy was appalled by the
carnage, and compelled to retire from the field.

The charge upon McRae’s battery was made on foot, and was never
surpassed for the cool and deliberate determination with which the rebel
infantry pressed forward undismayed to their work. The iron hail belched
forth from the guns swept through their ranks, opening a pathway through
the columns, which closed up and moved onward, apparently heedless of
the losses they sustained. Volley after volley from the batteries poured
destruction on the advancing foe. But still they came on steadily under
the fire, pouring forth in return volley upon volley, and closing with
their revolvers and bayonets, until the last brave man was shot down
while standing faithfully by his gun. During all this time the New
Mexicans remained inactive, and when once convinced of the danger they
were in, fled in haste, leaving the thrice heroic McRae alone with his
gunners, who fell one by one till he stood alone before the enemy. When
this fearless man saw that he was utterly abandoned, he sat down, with
sublime coolness, on one of his useless guns, with his face to the
enemy, waiting for the glorious death which soon came to his relief. A
ball struck him on the forehead, and he fell by the gun his courage had
defended to the last.

Captain Plimpton’s regulars stood their ground and fought until one-half
their number were wounded, or dead and dying on the field, when they
were compelled to retire.

When the battery was lost, the day was decided in favor of the enemy,
and the Federal forces retreated to Fort Craig.

Colonel Canby had in the engagement about 1,500 men, consisting of
regulars and volunteers. The force of the enemy, under Colonel Steele,
was from 1,500 to 2,000. Our loss, according to the best information,
was 50 or 60 killed, and about 140 wounded. The loss of the enemy was
estimated at from 100 to 200 killed and wounded. Captain Rossel, of the
regulars, was taken by the Texans, his horse having been drowned in
crossing the river.




                      THE BATTLE OF APACHE CAÑON.

                            MARCH 28, 1862.


The immediate consequence of the battle of Valvende was that the
insurgents marched directly past Fort Craig, which for want of men and
provisions they were powerless to invest or capture, direct on
Albuquerque and Santa Fé, which fell into their power without
resistance. Albuquerque was the depot of United States Government
stores, most of which was removed on the advance of the insurgents, and
the rest destroyed. The occupation of Santa Fé was followed by the
proclamation of a provisional government, which however never entered
into practical operation. Fort Craig still remained in the rebel rear,
and Fort Union in the possession of the national troops, on the
north-east, from which direction reinforcements might be expected. The
policy of the insurgents was therefore either to capture Fort Union
before relief could arrive, or maintain their position, isolating Fort
Craig until that post should be compelled to surrender for want of
supplies.

Meantime, news of the critical condition of affairs having reached the
Colorado territory and Kansas, troops were at once organized to go to
the relief of the threatened positions. By forced marches, scarcely
paralleled in history, a Colorado regiment 950 strong, under Colonel
Hough, reached Fort Union on the 13th of March. Here he gathered around
him all the troops available, or possible to obtain, and marched for
Santa Fé, to give battle to the invaders. The latter moved their forces
forward to meet him. The numbers on both sides were nearly equal—between
1,200 and 1,500. They met at a point called Apache Pass.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES RENO. FRANKLIN. MCCLERNAND. DUPONT. WILKES.]

The main fight took place at Apache Cañon, eighty miles from Fort Union,
and twenty miles from Santa Fé. Three battalions, one under Major
Chivington, one under Captain Lewis, and one under Captain Wynkoop,
advanced to the cañon, on the 28th, when the pickets reported no enemy
in sight. The command then advanced, when shots were fired at them by
the Texans, who were in ambush and succeeded in killing four privates.
The Union men, under Hough, rushed on them, killing 20 or 30 Texans,
wounding many of them, and taking seven prisoners, four officers and
three privates. Major Chivington’s command, which went ahead and
surprised the Texan pickets, taking 67 prisoners, and 64 provision
wagons, now arrived, and a plan of action was determined upon. It was to
meet the enemy in front and flank them at the same time.

About 12 o’clock they advanced, and the action became general, the
Coloradans doing wonders. The battery under Captain Ritter, and also the
howitzer battery under Lieutenant Claflin, swept the Texans from the
field. The fight lasted until four o’clock, when flags of truce were
interchanged to bury the dead and care for the wounded. The enemy had
about 2,000 men and one 6-pounder. The Unionists had 1,300 men, one six
and one 12-pounder, and four howitzers. The enemy lost their entire
train (64 wagons and provisions), 230 mules, about 150 killed, 200
wounded and 93 taken prisoners, among whom were 13 officers.

The Texans, when surprised, supposed it was Colonel Canby’s force that
was coming. The Texan officer in command, with two of his companies,
made several attempts to charge on the Union men and seize their
batteries, but they were each time repulsed, with tremendous loss, while
daring, noble deeds were performed by the Federal soldiers. At one time,
the Texan companies charged within a few yards of the Union batteries.

The defeat at Apache Pass proved an effectual check on the invaders, and
so far weakened their forces as to compel their abandonment of the
territory, and its complete restoration under the national authority.

The enemy fled into Arizona, where they found it useless to remain, and
applied to the authorities of Mexico for permission to cross their
territory on their return home, but were refused; they however succeeded
in reaching Texas. A reinforcement of Federal troops soon after arrived
in New Mexico.




                       FIGHT AT BLOOMING GAP, VA.

                           FEBRUARY 14, 1862.


To General F. W. Lander’s brigade had been assigned the perilous duty of
protecting the Baltimore and Ohio railroad at Cumberland, Md., and the
various towns and strategic points in Virginia within a radius of forty
or fifty miles from that centre, at several of which his troops were
quartered.

On the 13th of February, Lander received information that a brigade of
rebels under General Carson had occupied Blooming Gap, a strong pass in
the mountains seven miles beyond the Cacapon river, whose turbid waters,
swollen by the storms of winter, were deemed an impassable barrier to
the advance of the Federal forces. No bridge spanned the torrent, and
the blackened buttress and crumbled pier gave evidence that the
incendiary torch had been at work.

Lander was then at Pawpaw Tunnels, on the Maryland shore of the Potomac,
a station on the Baltimore and Ohio railroad, midway between Hancock and
Cumberland, with a small force. He immediately marched to New Creek, in
Hampshire county, Va., to join the detachment of troops at that point,
where he also hastily concentrated all his available command. Taking
twenty wagons loaded with lumber, he proceeded to a point on the Cacapon
river, seven miles south of the railroad, and between the hours of nine
and one o’clock at night he improvised a bridge one hundred and eighty
feet long, by placing the wagons in the river as a foundation, over
which he marched his force of four thousand men, and advanced upon the
enemy’s pickets before the dawn of day.

With five hundred of the First Virginia cavalry, under Colonel
Anastanzel, he had designed to charge through the rebel camp at the Gap,
and then form immediately in his rear, cut off the retreat, and capture
the whole force, after the Federal infantry, following up the cavalry
charge, should have completed the discomfiture of the enemy. But the
rebels had retired before Lander’s approach; and when led by the General
and his staff, the cavalry flew through the Gap and beyond it, they met
with no opposition. Colonel Anastanzel was at once ordered to push
forward on the Winchester road with the cavalry, reconnoitre, and, if
possible, overtake and capture the baggage of the enemy.

General Lander meantime brought up Colonel Carroll with the Eighth Ohio
regiment, and the Seventh Virginia, Colonel Evans, for a support.
Colonel Anastanzel encountered the enemy at the head of the pass, two
miles from Blooming. He was met by a sharp fire, and halted his command.
On hearing the firing, General Lander came up and led the charge,
followed by Major Armstrong, Assistant Adjutant-General; Lieutenants
Fitz-James O’Brien, the well-known poet of his staff, and Major
Bannister, Paymaster U.S.A., who had volunteered for the expedition. A
group of rebel officers were distant about three hundred yards,
encouraging their men. General Lander being the best mounted, outran the
rest of the party, and cut off the retreat of the rebel officers.

“Surrender, gentlemen,” he said, coolly dismounting, and extending his
hand to receive the sword of Colonel Baldwin, over whom an instant
before he had appeared to be riding.

Five of the rebel officers surrendered to General Lander, and four
others immediately afterward, to the officers of his staff, among them
the Assistant Adjutant-General of General Carson.

By this time the rebel infantry, perceiving the small number of their
adversaries, commenced a heavy fire from the woods, but the cavalry had
recovered from its panic, and now rushed up the hill. General Lander
ordered Anastanzel to charge up the road, and capture the baggage of the
enemy. The cavalry dashed forward, and the advance guard soon overtook
and turned fifteen wagons and horses out of the road. Colonel Evans now
came up with his regiment of infantry, and captured many more of the
rebels. Colonel Carroll cleared the road as he went, both infantry
regiments behaving admirably, following and engaging the enemy to the
last, until ordered back. The pursuit was continued eight miles.

The result of this affair was the capture of eighteen commissioned
officers, and forty-five non-commissioned officers and privates.
Thirty-three of the rebels were killed and wounded, with a loss on the
Union side of seven killed and wounded.

During this engagement Lieutenant Fitz-James O’Brien was shot mortally
while in advance of his comrades, and like the author-soldier Winthrop,
immortalized his name with the sword, as he had before proved himself
great with the pen.

General Dunning, of Lander’s command, returned to New Creek the same day
from an expedition to Moorfield, forty miles south of Romney, having
captured 225 beef cattle and 4,000 bushels of corn. In a skirmish two of
his men were wounded, and several rebels killed.




                 EAST TENNESSEE UNDER CONFEDERATE RULE.


The history of the world has never exhibited more exalted devotion to an
idea, nor a more splendid patriotism than that of the people of East
Tennessee. We may almost challenge the records of religious history to
produce anything more like holy enthusiasm, than the lofty inspiration
which has characterized these people. In no country, and among no class
can be found more heroic persistence or unfaltering adherence to
principle than has exalted the patriotism of this region. With many
inhabitants of the eastern portion of the State, loyalty and devotion to
the Union became in truth a part of their religion.

The rebel leaders knew that they had very little sympathy in East
Tennessee, and took measures to crush out all Union sentiment with the
iron heel of military despotism. Any expression of sympathy with the
Union cause, any co-operation of its inhabitants with the loyalists,
either for their own protection or for the aid of the Government, was
punished as a crime. The presses of that part of the State had all been
silenced or converted to their own use by the Secessionists, with one
exception. _The Knoxville Whig_ remained true to the Union. Its vigorous
defence of the Government, its exposures and denunciations of the rebel
leaders, its unsparing invective against the rebellion, and its bold,
defiant appeals to the people, rang like a clarion through the hills and
valleys of East Tennessee, and as the echo gathered from thousands of
loyal voices, it made itself heard through all the valleys and mountain
passes of that noble border State.

The heroic editor of this paper was not to be silenced either in his
voice or his press without a vigorous struggle. The Rev. Wm. G. Brownlow
had learned how to denounce and how to endure, for that is a lesson most
Methodist clergymen are called upon to learn; and being brave in deeds
as well as words, he stood forth in defence of the country he loved,
when she greatly needed the power of his eloquence and the strength of
his arm. The popularity which this man had won by his uprightness, his
courage, and firm adherence to the Constitution, gave his opinions a
force that made him an object of peculiar importance to the enemy—yet
they hesitated to lay violent hands upon a man whose words were more
potent than their bayonets.

He was frequently threatened by soldiers passing through Knoxville from
other States, yet none dared to execute their threats. His family were
inspired with the same lofty heroism, and on one occasion when a company
of rebels came to his house to haul down the Stars and Stripes, which
was kept floating over his domicil, one of his daughters stepped out to
meet them, and by her courage and decision protected the flag.

The suppression of this undaunted advocate of the Union, and faithful
and fearless witness against secession, became an inevitable necessity;
and at last, in the hope that he would at least become silent on
political affairs, it was resolved to offer him the alternative of the
oath of allegiance or the cell of a prison. He chose the latter, and in
a valedictory to his readers, published October 26, which must ever be
memorable for its heroic defence of the Union, its bold denunciation of
the rebels and their course, he announced to his readers the suspension
of his paper. This remarkable address, which, under the circumstances,
rises to the sublime in its moral courage, closed with these words:


  “Exchanging, with proud satisfaction, the editorial chair and the
  sweet endearments of home for a cell in the prison, or the lot of an
  exile, I have the honor to be, &c.

                                                   WILLIAM G. BROWNLOW.”


Mr. Brownlow was sent to prison, and for months occupied a room with
several other patriots who preferred imprisonment to denial of the
government they loved. Here he was in daily expectation of being led
forth to execution. Though suffering from ill-health he was no way
daunted by the dark fate that threatened him. Nor were these
anticipations groundless, for during his stay there, many a brave man
left that prison to meet a violent death, and he had no reason to expect
a happier destiny.

During the closing months of the summer and fall the hopes of the people
were excited by promises of aid from the government. Loud and earnest
appeals were made for help, and with the energy of despair the people
clung to their principles, through every species of persecution,
robbery, arson, and imprisonment. Hundreds were hung or assassinated,
and the records of Tennessee are among the most heart-rending that this
war for the Union will leave to posterity.

The position of the rebel armies in western Tennessee was at that time
very strong, but the importance of keeping their lines of communication
open with the Atlantic States was great, and thoroughly understood by
the loyalists. To cut these lines was to the Federals a work of pressing
necessity; and in view of the probable redemption of East Tennessee, the
loyalists organized, and on the night of November 8 they destroyed
several bridges, and broke the lines. Two of these were on the Georgia
State road, two on Chickamanye Creek, Hamilton county, and one on the
East Tennessee and Georgia railroad, on Hiawassee river, Bradley county.
Besides these, two bridges on the East Tennessee and Georgia railroad on
Lick Creek, Green County, and another on Holstein river, were also
burned. The rebels were thrown into consternation by these events, and
their leaders took the most active measures to arrest and punish the
perpetrators. A correspondence between some of the prominent men ensued,
and a large portion of the letters was discovered among other papers and
effects captured after the battle of Mill Spring, which took place on
the 19th of January, 1862. This correspondence, in which the names
Colonel William B. Wood and General F. K. Zollicoffer appear, prove that
the majority of the people were unalterably for the Union, and that they
could only be restrained by the most oppressive and cruel measures.
Colonel Wood wrote to J. P. Benjamin, the Secretary of War, asking what
disposition should be made of the bridge-burners, to which Mr. Benjamin
replied—“All such as can be identified as having been engaged in
bridge-burning are to be tried summarily by drumhead court-martial, and
if found guilty, executed on the spot by hanging. It would be well to
leave their bodies hanging in the vicinity of the burnt bridges.”

The loyalists were encouraged in their cause by the devotion of Hon.
Andrew Johnson, U. S. Senator, and Hon. Horace Maynard, M. C., for
Tennessee, whose eloquent and powerful appeals, and confident assurances
of aid, cheered the hearts of the people.

Thousands of East Tennesseeans escaped by night, wandering along
unfrequented roads, until they reached Kentucky, where they organized
regiments, under the direction of the Federal commanders. Their
cherished desire was to return to their own State, with a powerful army,
and redeem their soil. The atrocity of the rebel guerrillas drove them
almost to a passion of revenge, and when disappointed at the
announcement that their time had not come, and that they must await a
more favorable condition of the army, hundreds of them, when ordered to
retreat from the border lines of their State, strayed from the ranks,
despairing and heart-sick, and falling down by the way, wept bitterly.
Several of them, exhausted by hard labor and forced marches, never rose
again, but were afterwards found dead on the road to Mount Vernon.

On the 26th of November the house of a gentleman named Bell was attacked
by an armed party of the enemy and set on fire. The inmates, a large
family of nine persons, were consigned to the flames. Two alone of the
whole household escaped this horrible fate.

On the 29th a band of twenty-one Union prisoners at Nashville were
compelled to take the oath of allegiance, and enter a company in the
rebel army.

Leadbetter, the secession commander in East Tennessee, had his
headquarters at Greenville, and on the 30th of November issued a
proclamation promising protection and pardon to all who would lay down
their arms and submit to the Confederate government. From this clemency
he excepted bridge-burners and destroyers of railroad tracks. He closed
his proclamation with the assurance that “they will be tried by drumhead
court-martial, and be hung on the spot.” This terrible order was put
into execution a few days afterward. Jacob M. Hemslier and Henry Fry,
two Unionists, being tried and pronounced guilty of these offences, were
hung.

The days of hope for the Unionists were weary and prolonged, but
deliverance was drawing nigh. The loyal men of the western part of the
State organized to oppose the measures of the leaders, and early in
January a bold resistance was made in Carroll, Weakly, McNairy, and
other counties, against the conscription act. Rebel troops were sent
into these counties to compel submission, and enforce obedience.

The defeat and death of Zollicoffer, the breaking up of his army, and
the destruction of his stronghold, at last gave a brilliant promise to
these persecuted people that their deliverance was drawing nigh. This
event, succeeded in a few weeks by the capture of Fort Henry, Fort
Donelson, the evacuation of Bowling Green and Columbus, and the
occupation of Nashville, filled every true heart with rejoicing, and the
good old flag once more swept its folds freely over the houses of East
Tennessee.

[Illustration:

  BOMBARDMENT OF FORT HENRY, FEB. 6, 1862.
]

The appointment of Hon. Andrew Johnson as military governor of Tennessee
was greeted with enthusiasm by the people. His reputation and
conservative principles were a guarantee for the character of his
administration, and he soon began to rally to his support the wavering
and timid of the people who were still apprehensive that the
Confederates would return and restore their rule.

Parson Brownlow, after having borne a long and severe confinement in
prison, in which his health suffered terribly, was released, and sent
beyond the military lines of the Confederates. His reception by the
Federal guards was enthusiastic and joyous in the extreme. As soon as
his health permitted he visited several cities in the West, where he was
greeted with overwhelming demonstrations of popular admiration and
respect. On his arrival at New York, May 17th, he was honored with a
public reception at the Academy of Music, which was densely filled with
a brilliant audience, eager to welcome him.




                      CAPTURE OF FORT HENRY, TENN.

                           FEBRUARY 6, 1862.


The brilliant victory obtained by General Thomas’ army over the
Confederate forces at Mill Spring, on the 19th of January, laid open the
rebel lines to the successful advance of the Federal arms, and served to
stimulate the commanders of the land and naval forces to avail
themselves of the opportunity thus afforded.

Previous to the battle of Mill Spring, General Grant, with a large
force, had left Cairo and marched toward Columbus, for the purpose of
reconnoitering the country, and to prevent rebel reinforcements moving
from that point to the assistance of General Buckner, at Bowling Green,
Ky., who was then threatened by the approach of General Buell’s army.
Upon the return of General Grant’s division to Cairo, a combined
movement of the land and naval forces was determined on for the purpose
of capturing Fort Henry, on the Tennessee river, in Henry county, Tenn.,
just beyond the Kentucky State line.

Fort Henry and its approaches were reconnoitered on the 21st January by
the United States gunboat Lexington, with a view to ascertain its
strength and the position of the rebels. She went within two miles of
the fort, and flung a number of shells into it without eliciting any
reply. At first it was thought the rebels had evacuated the work, but on
approaching it still nearer pickets were discovered at various points.
The heavy guns on the work were seen distinctly; also a number of field
pieces. In addition to the fort proper, numerous earthworks had been
thrown up on a high bluff above the fort, on the west bank of the river.
This additional work, named Fort Hieman, commanded Fort Henry.

On the 22d January, Brigadier-General C. F. Smith, commanding the second
division of General Grant’s army, was at Crown Point, Ky., where he had
arrived with 6,000 men after a fatiguing march of over 100 miles from
Paducah. He proceeded thence on a personal reconnoissance, on the
gunboat Lexington, in the direction of Fort Henry. The gunboat advanced
up the west channel of the river to a point within one mile and a half
from the fort. General Smith obtained an excellent view of the rebel
fort, camp and garrison, and sent his report to headquarters. He then
marched his division back to Paducah.

The flotilla of gunboats, which had been so long in course of
preparation on the Ohio and Mississippi, was now ready to take part in
the impending battles of the nation, and to assume that prominence in
the momentous events which were to follow to which they have proved
themselves justly entitled.

Flag-officer Andrew H. Foote was appointed by the Government to command
the naval forces on the Upper Mississippi and the Western waters, and
now led forth his gallant fleet to attack the enemy, in conjunction with
the land forces under General Ulysses S. Grant. The fleet consisted of

_Fleet Officers._—Flag-Officer Andrew H. Foote; Fleet Captain, Commodore
A. M. Pennock; Ordnance Officer, Lieutenant J. F. Sanford; Ordnance
Lieutenant, Byron Wilson; Flag Lieutenant, James M. Prickett. _Essex_, 9
_guns_, Commander William D. Porter. _St. Louis_, 13 _guns_,
Lieutenant-Commanding Leonard Paulding. _Cincinnati_, 13 _guns_,
Commander R. N. Stembel. _Carondelet_, 13 _guns_, Commander Henry Walke.
_Conestoga_, 9 _guns_, Lieutenant-Commanding —— Phelps. _Tyler_, 9
_guns_, Lieutenant-Commanding W. Gwin.

For several days, at Paducah, the utmost vigilance was exercised at the
headquarters of the Provost Marshal, in issuing passes, and on Sunday
and Monday, the 3d February, no persons were allowed in or out of the
lines. Half a dozen gunboats steamed leisurely into port and brought
their black forms to anchor opposite the levee, in the centre of the
river.

Monday afternoon, steamers commenced coming up from Cairo, laden with
troops and stores, and by night the whole landing in front of the town
was crowded with the arrivals. The fleet which came up brought General
Grant and Staff, and the first division, under command of
Brigadier-General McClernand. The steamers were under command of
Commodore G. W. Graham, and consisted of the following boats: City of
Memphis, Iatan, D. A. January, Chancellor, Alp, “W. H. B.,” New Uncle
Sam, Rob Roy, Alex. Scott, Minnehaha, Illinois, Emerald, and Fanny
Bullett.

The first division, on these boats, was made up of two brigades,
composed as follows, and commanded by General John A. McClernand:—_First
Brigade, Colonel Oglesby, Commanding._—Seventh Illinois, Colonel Cook;
Eighth Illinois, Lieutenant-Colonel Rhoades; Eighteenth Illinois,
Lieutenant-Colonel Lawler; Twenty-ninth Illinois, Colonel Reardon;
Thirtieth Illinois, Lieutenant-Colonel Dennis; Thirty-first Illinois,
Colonel John A. Logan; Swartz’s and Dresser’s Batteries; Stewart’s,
Dollins’, O. Harnett’s and Carmichael’s Cavalry.

_Second Brigade, W. H. L. Wallace, Commanding._—Eleventh Illinois,
Lieutenant-Colonel Hart; Twentieth Illinois, Colonel Marsh; Forty-fifth
Illinois, Colonel Smith; Forty-eighth Illinois, Colonel Harney; Taylor’s
and McAllister’s Batteries—in the latter four siege guns; Fourth
Illinois Cavalry, Colonel Kellogg; Seventh Illinois Cavalry, Colonel
Dickey.

Soon after arriving, General Grant and staff paid a visit to General
Smith, and had a conference, in which it was determined to forward the
division of General McClernand that night, and after landing them at
some point below Fort Henry, out of range of its guns, send the boats
back after General Smith’s division at Paducah. It was nearly midnight
before the boats took their departure.

The point at which the troops were landed is about four or five miles
below Fort Henry, opposite a small town in Kentucky, called Buffalo.
Immediately at the place is a clearing of about one hundred acres,
surrounded on three sides by high bluffs densely timbered, and reaching
down to the river. The troops, on landing, immediately took possession
of these eminences, and planted batteries which commanded the country in
every direction, and then awaited the arrival of the remaining forces,
under General Smith.

Tuesday afternoon, while the troops were disembarking, the Osband
Cavalry, with Carson’s and Carpenter’s scouts thoroughly examined the
country in every direction, even up to within two miles of Fort Henry.
Tuesday night was beautiful; a thousand camp-fires flashed through the
shadows that lay upon the amphitheatre of wooded hills. The sky was warm
and serenely purple, as if brooding over the first sweet blossoms of
May. The silver crescent of a new moon glittered in the western sky,
shedding a faint radiance over the tree-tops and sloping hill sides. All
at once the music of half a dozen bands broke through the stillness of
this lovely scene, and the “Star-Spangled Banner,” “Red, White and
Blue,” and “Columbia the Gem of the Ocean,” filled the night with bursts
of patriotic music. Then some dreamy strain followed, hushing the
soldier’s heart with thoughts of “Home, Sweet Home.”

On Wednesday, parties were out reconnoitering near the enemy’s works,
and in one case a squad of cavalry went within a mile of the fort and
encountered two hundred rebel horsemen. Both sides fired, when the
rebels ran, leaving one of their number dead, and carrying off three
severely wounded. One man on the Union side was shot through the brain,
and killed instantly. He was the first man who gave up his life in the
vicinity of Fort Henry.

It had been noticed that a steamer belonging to the rebels was busily
engaged in running from the fortifications to some point up or across
the river, which was doubtless bringing in reinforcements. Two of the
gunboats—the Taylor and Conestoga, ran up to nearly the centre of the
island, and dropped a few shells in the direction of the fort and the
steamer, with what result was not known. They effected a thorough
reconnoissance on both sides, and discovered two ugly torpedoes sunk in
the west channel, which they carefully hauled out and towed down to the
shore below.

During the day and night the division of General Smith, from Paducah,
arrived, and was landed on the west shore of the river, with a view of
operating against batteries supposed to be on that side, and also to
counteract a large body of troops, which scouts reported to be
concentrating opposite the fort.

Wednesday night was cold and most disagreeable. About eight o’clock a
heavy storm set in, which speedily quenched the camp-fires, and sent the
troops wet and disconsolate under any shelter that could be found. All
over the southern horizon, in the direction of Fort Henry, a tremendous
thunder storm swept its way, filling the hills with flashes of fiery
blue lightning, and shaking the forests with loud reverberations of
thunder. Hailing this burst of heaven’s artillery, rolling southward
toward the enemy, as a good omen, the Union soldiers pulled the wet
blankets closer around them, turned drearily in the yielding mud, and
fell asleep.

Thursday dawned cloudily, but towards nine o’clock it cleared up and the
sun came out warm and gloriously. Nature nowhere seemed to anticipate
the bloody event which gives the day prominence. A few more troops
arrived, among whom were the Ohio Seventh, Colonel Lauman, and the Ohio
Twelfth, Colonel Wood, both from Smithland, and which, together with the
Seventh Illinois, Lieutenant-Colonel Bancock; Thirteenth Missouri,
Colonel Wright; the Fifteenth Illinois, Colonel ——, and Company D, First
Missouri Artillery, made the Third Brigade, Colonel John Cook
commanding, assigned the right wing of the advance up the Tennessee
shore.

About ten o’clock the gunboats started slowly up the river, four iron
clad steamers leading abreast—the Essex, Captain Porter, on the right,
and the Cincinnati, Commodore Foote, on the left. The three wooden
gunboats ranged themselves abreast and followed, half a mile or so to
the rear.

The iron-clad boats moved up abreast, keeping up the west or high water
channel. Almost immediately on passing the lower end of the island, the
boats and the forts were in each others’ range, but on both sides an
ominous silence was preserved—a silence that betokened deadly intent on
the part of the belligerents. On swept the boats, coming in full view of
the long line of breastworks that broke the east shore—in full view of
the black muzzles of the heavy guns which seemed watching the approach
of the gallant little fleet in ominous silence—in full view of the flag
waving defiantly from a high staff in the centre of the works, until one
could almost see down the huge bore of the guns, the bright straps of
the shells, which seemed like leashes to prevent the deadly missiles
from springing forth upon their work of destruction—and yet not a
trigger was pulled on either side.

Less than a mile separated the fleet and the fort, and yet not a word
was said. The insurgents appeared to be confidently anticipating the
conflict; and grouped like statues around their guns, with lanyards
stretched, they waited for the onset.

When about six hundred yards from the fort, the bow-guns of the
flag-ship poured their contents into it, and so close after, that the
reports seemed almost one, the other three poured in their fire.
Scarcely had the smoke cleared from the muzzles of the pieces, ere the
whole ten guns of the rebels belched forth their contents, sending a
terrific iron shower in, above and around the gunboats. Taking their cue
from the others, the three wooden gunboats, which were about a mile
below, opened from their bow-guns, and then the contest was fairly
begun. For one hour the roar was so incessant that the successive
reports of the guns could not, in many cases, be distinguished.
Occasionally there would be a momentary lull—then a single reverberating
roar would give the key-note, and an instant after all the voices would
swell together in one tremendous chorus.

A thick cloud of smoke enveloped the boats, hiding them completely from
view. Over them hovered a dense white vapor, from which quick flashes of
flame leaped and quivered, incessantly followed by delicate balloon-like
forms of smoke, which burst like ghostly shadows from the enemy’s
shells.

From the very first, the fire of the rebel guns seemed directed at the
Essex. In their first volley two thirty-two pound shots struck the Essex
on the starboard bow, indenting deeply the iron sheathing, and then
glanced off, down the river, while a perfect storm of the iron missiles
whistled over her decks, and plowed into the water on either side. She
received in all eleven shots—one of which carried death through the
whole length of the vessel. It entered a larboard port, carried off the
head of the master’s mate, and passing on, entered the boiler. The steam
and water poured out, filling the whole space between decks, and causing
more destruction than all the enemy’s missiles put together—four men
were instantly suffocated, and some twenty-five severely scalded, among
whom was the gallant Commander Porter. The two pilots, who were in the
pilot-house above, had no escape except through a passage from below,
and up this the steam rushed, as if coming from a safety-valve, and of
course with fatal effect. Both these poor men perished.

Of course the Essex was thenceforth unmanageable. She slowly drifted
down the main channel, and was soon after met by a steamer, which towed
her down to the place occupied by the boats before starting. Soon after
the Essex became disabled, the pelting of the iron storm proved too hot
for endurance, and the rebel flag came rapidly down. The firing on the
part of the gunboats immediately ceased, and messengers were sent off
from the flag-boat, which found, upon landing, that the rebels were
disposed to an unconditional surrender. In scarcely more than an hour
after the first attack, the flag of Fort Henry was in the dust.

The fort was soon after taken possession of, and it was found that the
sum total of rebel prisoners was between seventy and one hundred, the
balance having left the night before on the steamer Dunbar.

Among those who surrendered were Brigadier-General Tilghman, Major
Corrico, Colonel Carmichael, Captain Hayden, of the Engineers, and
Captain Miller, with several other commissioned officers.

Ten of the rebels were found killed, and some twelve or fifteen wounded.
Three hundred and six tents were found on the west side of the river,
and about as many near the fort, all of which bore evidences of the
haste with which the rebels had evacuated their quarters. Several
hundred stands of arms were found, chiefly squirrel rifles and
double-barrelled shot-guns, also a large amount of clothing, forage,
provisions, wagons, mules and horses.

There was a large supply of ammunition, and when the Union forces
entered the fort there was beside each gun an abundance unexpended. The
tents were new and of excellent make, sufficient to shelter five or six
thousand men. The enemy had flour, corn, bacon and sugar in large
quantities, but no salt, and not a large supply of beef.

There were nineteen guns in position, of the following calibre: two
128-pounders, one 80-pounder, two 42-pounders, rifled, ten 32-pounders,
two 24-pound howitzers, two 12-pound howitzers. Three 6-pound smooth
bores, five 6-pound rifles, found outside the intrenchments.

A twenty-four-pound rifled gun exploded on the fourth round, and near
the close of the fight a shell from one of the Union boats entered the
eighty-pounder and burst, disabling it. Several caissons were captured
in the redan upon the west side of the river, but no guns were in
position.

Evidences abounded on all sides of the deadly accuracy of the Federal
gunners. Every one of the eleven log buildings within the ramparts was
perforated with shot, the roof of one of the small magazines was torn
open, hurdle-work scattered in all direction, half the guns knocked out
of place, and great gulleys cut in the parapet and the ground. A
thirty-two pounder bearing upon the gunboats had been struck by a Union
shell, completely shattering the muzzle. The ground beside the embrasure
was stained with blood, which lay in pools on the uneven surface. Beside
one of the buildings, with gray blankets thrown hastily over them, lay
six dead soldiers, all fearfully mutilated. Inside, ten wounded men were
stretched upon cots, or on the ground, some insensible, and others
rending the air with groans, while the surgeons of the garrison were
attending upon them. Just above, on the river, was the hospital ship of
the rebels, the stern-wheel steamer R. M. Patten, which had been
captured with the fort. The ensign of disease, the yellow flag, was
flying from the staff, waving off destruction from sixty invalids.


                            THE REBEL CAMP.

Upon a high plateau, the heavy trees had all been cut away over a large
area. They were designed for the construction of an abattis, and though
nothing had been done beyond chopping down the heavy timber, the large
trunks and limbs, lying in all directions, would have presented almost
insurmountable obstacles to the approach of cavalry or artillery, had
the rifle-pits, just beyond, been filled with men.

Crossing the rifle-pits, the Unionists were in the enemy’s camp, though
still more than half a mile from the fort. Here were the wall tents of a
regiment, all standing in complete order, with the camp-fires still
blazing, the copper pots of soup for dinner boiling over them, and the
half-made biscuits in the pans. Inside the tents everything was just as
the enemy had left it—pistols, shot-guns, muskets, bowie-knives,
clothing, tables partially set for dinner, letters half-written, with
the ink scarcely dry upon the open page, cards thrown down in the midst
of the game, overcoats, blankets, trunks, carpet sacks, and so on
through all the articles of camp life. It seemed as if the men were out
at guard-mounting, and expected to return in ten minutes.

Along the river bank were long rows of log barracks, enough to
accommodate two or three thousand men, and finished comfortably. Inside
they bore the same indications that the inmates had decamped without a
moment’s warning.


          ADVANCE OF NATIONAL GUNBOATS UP THE TENNESSEE RIVER.

In accordance with the instructions of Commodore Foote, given before the
attack on Fort Henry, immediately after the capture of the fort,
February 6, the gunboats Conestoga, Lexington and Tyler, under the
command of Lieutenant Phelps, advanced up the river twenty-five miles,
to the crossing of the Bowling Green and Memphis railway, breaking up a
portion of the railway bridge, and rendering it impassable. They next
proceeded to destroy the rebel gunboats and transports, capturing large
quantities of munitions of war and supplies, and advanced up the river
for upwards of two hundred miles to Eastport, in Mississippi, and
Florence, at the foot of Muscle Shoals, in Alabama, annihilating the
rebel flotilla in the Tennessee river. The expedition was welcomed at
every point by the inhabitants. Twenty-five Tennesseans enlisted at
Cerro Gordo, where also three steamers were seized, containing 250,000
feet of valuable ship timber.

Toward the latter part of February, intelligence reached Fort Henry that
the rebels were fortifying a point on the Tennessee river, near the
Mississippi State line, whereupon Lieutenant-Commanding William Gwin,
with the gunboats Tyler and Lexington, were sent forward to reconnoitre
the position.

Having learned that the rebels had occupied and were fortifying a place
called Pittsburgh, nine miles above, on the right bank of the river, he
determined to attack them.

At twelve M. the Taylor, followed by the Lexington,
Lieutenant-Commanding Shirk, proceeded up the river. When within twelve
hundred yards of Pittsburgh, they were opened upon by the rebel
batteries, consisting of six or eight field pieces, some rifled. Getting
within one thousand yards, the Taylor and Lexington opened a
well-directed fire, and had the satisfaction of silencing the batteries.

They then proceeded abreast of the place, and, under the cover of grape
and canister, landed two armed boats from each vessel, containing,
besides their crews, a portion of company C, Captain Thaddeus Phillips,
and company K, First-Lieutenant John C. Rider, of the Thirty-second
regiment, Illinois Volunteers (sharpshooters). Second-master Jason
Gondy, commanded the boats of the Taylor, and Second-master Martin Dunn,
commanded the boats of the Lexington. The landing was successfully
accomplished. This small force drove back the rebels, and held them in
check until they had accomplished their difficult object, which was to
discover the real strength and purpose of the enemy, and to destroy a
house in close proximity to the batteries. In addition to their
artillery, the enemy had a force of not less than two regiments of
infantry, and a regiment of cavalry.

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS.
]




                        THE BURNSIDE EXPEDITION.


                SAILING OF THE FLEET FOR HATTERAS INLET.

                          JANUARY 12–20, 1862.

Immediately after the departure of the expedition to operate against
Port Royal and the adjacent territory, the organization of another
armament, to proceed to the North Carolina coast, was commenced, and
like its predecessor, was mainly fitted out at Annapolis, Md., and
gradually concentrated at Fortress Monroe. After many delays, it sailed
from that place for its destination on the 12th of January, 1862. The
expedition consisted of a large naval force of light-draught boats,
taken from the commercial marine, fitted up and armed, and a numerous
retinue of transports and supply vessels, all under the command of
Commodore L. M. Goldsborough. There were thirty-one gunboats in the
expedition, exclusive of transports, carrying an aggregate of
ninety-four guns. Five of these, called “floating batteries,” were
vessels of strong hulls, heavily braced, and cut down so as to present
but a small surface when in action, and designed to be anchored during
an engagement. The entire number of vessels of all classes was one
hundred and twenty-five.

The land force consisted of about fourteen thousand men, under the
command of Brigadier-General Ambrose E. Burnside, who was also
Commander-in-chief of the expedition. It consisted of fifteen regiments,
divided into three brigades, commanded in their order by Generals John
G. Foster, Jesse L. Reno, and John G. Parke.

The vessels encountered adverse weather immediately after starting from
Fortress Monroe, and a number of the transports were obliged to put
back, having experienced one of those severe storms which have rendered
the coast of Cape Hatteras a terror and a proverb to the mariner. For a
time the expedition was in deadly peril. Communication between the
vessels of the fleet was rendered impossible, and wreck and disaster
appeared to be their inevitable fate. Several gunboats and vessels were
driven ashore and lost, and a number of valuable lives sacrificed to the
fury of the elements, in a vain endeavor to succor some of the disabled
vessels.

Along the whole coast of North Carolina there are many desolate
sand-bars or islands, varying from half a mile to two miles in width,
intersected by numerous inlets, which with few exceptions, are not
navigable. A principal one of these, known as Hatteras Inlet, opening
into the waters of Albemarle Sound, was the point where Commodore
Goldsborough’s fleet was now endeavoring to concentrate.

On Monday morning, January 13, they were off Hatteras Inlet. Day broke
with a leaden sky, against which the angry, white-crested waves raced
their mad career along the reefs of Cape Hatteras, that threw its
headland oceanward but eight miles distant. Fourteen steamers were
laboring to weather the storm point. Bravely they breasted on,
staggering beneath the giant blows of each successive sea, the decks
swept fore and aft, and all on board reeling from side to side like
drunken men. One figure stood immovable, grasping the bits and scanning
the horizon for traces of ships as they rose on the glittering mass of
foam. It was the square, manly form of General Burnside, whose anxiety
for the fate of his army was intense. Many of the vessels on which the
troops were embarked were nothing more than huge top-hampered river
steamers, with projecting guards, that would break up like cardboard if
fairly struck by a sea.

At dark, all hands on the flag-ship were startled by the report of a
gun, and on reaching the hurricane deck they saw a large brig drifting
rapidly on to the bar. As it grew darker, and her outline became less
defined, the excitement became intense. She was evidently in a most
critical position, and every moment might be her last. Slowly the black
hull rose and fell, each time gliding nearer and nearer to the vortex of
white breakers, which, once reached, nothing could save her. Suddenly a
fringe of musketry fire surrounded her bulwarks, and blue-lights were
burnt in her tops. Volley after volley succeeded each other in rapid
succession, yet apparently no one could help her; no human power dared
face the tempest, and, perhaps, share her doom. General Burnside boarded
every steamtug in the harbor; offered any reward, and also to go himself
in aid of the brig, but all held back. Were three hundred men to be
launched into eternity, and no effort made to save them? At last one
brave seaman volunteered to take his little steamer out—General Burnside
jumped aboard her—but by the earnest entreaties of the officers he
delegated the honorable position to one of his staff, for his heroic
conduct had nerved every brave heart in his command.


                  BURNSIDE’S FLEET AT HATTERAS INLET.

From the 13th of January until the 4th of February, the fleet at
Hatteras Inlet experienced an almost uninterrupted series of gales, and
the two dykes which reach the east and west boundaries of the inlet,
were fringed with perpetual spray and foam from the breakers. The
lighter vessels, comprising the propeller gunboats, the side-wheel
steamers, and most of the schooner transports, had gone safely through
the “Swash,” and were securely anchored some two miles from the throat
of the inlet, while the larger ships and barks were still riding
outside, with colors continually flying for a pilot.

Many of these vessels were crowded with men suffering for the want of
necessary supplies, especially water, and the largest of the transports
had a draught of from two to four feet more than the specifications of
the guarantee should have allowed. The consequence was, that they
grounded in attempting the passage. An occasional cessation of a few
hours in the storm afforded opportunity that could be taken advantage of
by vessels to try the dangerous passage, aided by the tugs, that
responded but shyly to the signals for aid. And thus for days the
severity of the gale defied all communication between the vessels
outside of the bar, as they battled with a fiercer foe than that upon
the land—fighting a very hand-to-hand fight with storm and ocean.

Nearly three weeks passed before all the vessels of the expedition were
brought in safety through the swash to anchorage within the inlet.
Though the severity of the storm had threatened the destruction of the
entire armada, and occasioned the deepest gloom and anxiety in the minds
of thousands of loyal friends at home, the brave and skillful commanders
were never despondent, and met the new dangers of each day with hopeful
energy and perseverance. Eight vessels of various sizes were cast away
or foundered in the storm, though but few lives were lost.

Colonel J. W. Allen and Surgeon T. S. Weller, of the Ninth New Jersey,
were drowned from a small boat while on a noble mission to relieve a
suffering crew.

Many of the large transports were grounded in attempting to pass inside
the inlet. From the necessity of lightening them, vast quantities of
property were lost or thrown overboard. An expedition beset with such
difficulties, all overcome by indomitable perseverance, has seldom been
recorded in the history of any country.




                       CAPTURE OF ROANOKE ISLAND.

                           FEBRUARY 8, 1862.


After a detention of three weeks in sight of Hatteras Inlet, occasioned
by the severity of the storm, and the difficulty of piloting the
heavily-laden vessels through the inlet, the expedition received sailing
orders on the 4th of February, and proceeded on the next day to the
point of attack. The fleet anchored on the night of February 5, about
ten miles below the southern point of Roanoke Island, from whence they
again weighed anchor at eight o’clock on the morning of the 6th. A storm
retarded their progress, and they remained over night without passing
through Roanoke Inlet to Croatan Sound.

At ten o’clock on the morning of the 7th, the gunboats, under the lead
of the Flag-officer’s ship, moved forward, and were soon inside the
narrow passage leading into Croatan Sound, known as Roanoke Inlet. The
mainland juts eastward, forming a point of marshy land at the southern
extremity of Croatan Sound, which is the only navigable water leading
past Roanoke Island. A small island forms the eastern boundary of the
channel, while the western shore is a low marshy point. Following
Commodore Goldsborough’s squadron were the gunboats of the coast
division, all of which passed through without interruption.

The S. R. Spaulding, with General Burnside on board, next passed
through, but the remainder of the transports were detained about two
hours. The rebel gunboats could now be seen close in shore, evidently
under the guns of batteries on shore. As the fleet passed into the
sound, a signal was fired from one of the rebel gunboats, to announce
its approach. This was about half-past ten o’clock. At half-past eleven
the first gun was fired from the flag-ship, and was replied to by the
rebels. The Flag-officer hoisted the signal: “This day our country
expects that every man will do his duty.” The effect was electric. The
men worked their guns with unflagging energy, determined that their
country should have nothing to complain of in relation to them. As the
Federal vessels came within shorter range, the fire became more rapid,
but the regular fire did not commence until noon, when the flag-ship
displayed the signal for close action.

The number of the rebel gunboats visible in the early part of the
engagement was seven. As the vessels came into closer action, they moved
to the northward, with the design of drawing the Union fleet after them,
and bring them under the guns of their batteries on the island. At
twelve o’clock the engagement became general, between the retreating
gunboats of the rebels and the Union fleet, varied by an occasional shot
from a battery on shore. The firing was exceedingly brisk for some time,
but the distance was evidently too great for destructive effect. The one
hundred-pound Parrott gun on board the Southfield, to which the
Flag-Officer transferred his flag, boomed forth terrific explosions,
followed by the roar and crash of flying shells. The puff of smoke in
the air was almost simultaneous with the splash of fragments in the
water. The rebel gunboats kept up a steady fire in reply. Their fire was
varied at times by the louder report of a hundred-pound Parrott gun on
board one of their vessels. The Sawyer gun on board the Fanny, which was
captured by the enemy at Hatteras Inlet, was the most annoying in its
effects, as the range was long and very accurate.

The fire from the fort indicated a weak force working the guns. The
rebel gunboats retired steadily a considerable distance up the sound. A
line of piles driven into the bed across the principal channel,
obstructed the progress of the Union vessels in the pursuit of the
retreating rebels, who occupied an inner channel under the guns of their
battery. The Union fleet now turned their attention to the fort, which
kept up a steady and rapid fire.

On the afternoon of the 7th, the transports, with the land forces, were
all brought safely through Roanoke Inlet, and clustered securely in rear
of the bombarding fleet. General Burnside gave immediate orders for
landing the forces, which was done at a small cove, known as Ashby’s
Harbor. In less than an hour four thousand men were landed, and by
eleven at night, the entire force, excepting one regiment, were on the
island, and their bivouac-fires lighted up the shore and the woods for
the distance of a mile.

At nine o’clock on the morning of the 8th, a few shots were exchanged
between the Federal gunboats and the battery, which ceased after fifteen
minutes’ duration, and was not renewed during the day. The rebel
gunboats had retreated, and all interest now centered in the movements
of the land forces.

From definite information received by General Burnside, the position of
all the works on the island was clearly known, and his movements were
based on this knowledge. The plan of attack consisted of a central
attacking column, led by Brigadier-General Foster; a left flanking
column to attack the right of the enemy’s work, under Brigadier-General
Reno, and a right flank column to attack the left of the enemy’s
position, under the command of Brigadier-General Parke.

The approach to the enemy’s position was through a swampy wood, with a
dense undergrowth, rendering it almost impenetrable. An ordinary
cart-road leading through this wood from the shore to the fieldwork, a
distance of about a mile, was the only mode of communication. The woods
in front of the battery had been cut down a distance of three hundred
yards, forming an open space to be played on by the rebel guns, about
two hundred feet wide. The woods immediately in rear of the work were
also cut down to permit the manœuvreing of their own forces.

Their battery consisted of an earthwork with three faces covering the
open space before, and the woods at each side of the open space, but
with a general direction of fire to the front. The guns were mounted in
embrasure, and consisted of a twenty-four-pounder brass Dahlgren
howitzer, a long eighteen-pounder brass field-gun, and a twelve-pounder
brass field piece. In front of the work was a ditch eight feet wide and
about three feet deep, filled with water. The earthwork was about
thirty-five yards wide, and was erected across the road. The ground in
front of the work was a deep marsh, on which the trees which were felled
still lay. The difficult nature of this ground was increased by the pits
from which the turf and earth for the fieldwork had been taken. Branches
were strewn over the front of the work, making it impossible to discover
it from the wood in front.

The defending force consisted of about three hundred men, within the
breastwork, and about two thousand as a reserve, partly deployed as
skirmishers on the left of the battery. The rebels relied chiefly for
the defence of their flanks on the almost impenetrable nature of the
wood on each side. Their entire force, with the exception of the force
working the battery, was scattered in front and in the woods on the left
as skirmishers.

The Federal army advanced from the bivouac-ground of the evening
previous, where they had spent the night with nothing but thin overcoats
to protect them from a cold, driving rain. They had left their knapsacks
and blankets on the transports, each man carrying nothing but his
haversack, with three days’ provisions, and his cartridge-box, with
forty rounds of ball-cartridge. The centre, under the command of General
Foster, was composed of the Twenty-fifth Massachusetts, Colonel Upton;
Twenty-third Massachusetts, Colonel Kurtz; Twenty-seventh Massachusetts,
Colonel Lee, and the Tenth Connecticut, Colonel Russell, and moved
forward about eight o’clock. They were followed by the second column,
under General Reno, consisting of the Twenty-first Massachusetts,
Lieutenant-Colonel Maggi; the Fifty-first New York, (Shepard Rifles,)
Colonel Ferrero; Ninth New Jersey, and the Fifty-first Pennsylvania,
Colonel Hartraaf. The third column, led by General Parke, was formed of
the Fourth Rhode Island, Colonel Rodman; First battalion, Fifth Rhode
Island, Major Wright; and Ninth New York, Colonel Hawkins.

A brilliant, well contested fight of two hours’ duration put the Federal
forces in possession of Roanoke Island, with all the batteries, mounting
thirty guns, and Fort Forrest, on the mainland, mounting eight guns. It
resulted in the unconditional surrender of the rebel army on the island,
numbering 2,500 men, with all their arms and munitions of war. Captain
O. Jennings Wise, son of ex-Governor Wise of Virginia, lost his life in
this engagement. The Governor himself, being absent from his command on
the day of battle, escaped.

Colonel Russell, of the Tenth Connecticut, and Lieutenant-Colonel De
Monteuil, of the New York Fifty-third, were killed.

The Federal loss was fifty killed and one hundred and fifty wounded.
That of the rebels was about twenty killed, and sixty wounded.




                    EVACUATION OF BOWLING GREEN, KY.

                         FEBRUARY 14–16, 1862.


Before the commencement of hostilities in the State of Kentucky, the
rebel General Buckner, Commander-in-Chief of the State militia, seized
upon the town of Bowling Green, in Warren county, in the southern
section of the State, and occupied it as the grand centre and depot of
future military operations. The position was well chosen. It was
situated on the line of the Louisville and Nashville railway, and
connected also by rail with Memphis and Nashville; while water
communication through the Barren river was open to the Green river, the
Ohio, and Mississippi, and thus to all important points.

As a military post, its means of defence were also of the first
importance. The town lies on the south bank of Barren river, at a point
where the channel makes a bend not unlike a horse-shoe. The buildings
are situated a distance of five hundred yards from the banks, which rise
by jutted rocky sides fifty feet from the water level. A series of nine
swelling hills, or knolls, completely encompass the town on the land
side, and on these Buckner had erected a cordon of forts; some of stone,
and others of earth, twenty feet in thickness—all of great magnitude.
Forty-nine guns were mounted on the various fortifications, and great
engineering skill had been displayed in their construction.

On learning the defeat of Zollicoffer’s troops at Mill Spring, on the
19th of January, General A. S. Johnson, on the 25th, ordered the
evacuation of Bowling Green, and General Floyd’s brigade immediately
marched from thence to Fort Donelson. Active measures were then taken to
carry out the order further, by shipping heavy ordnance to Columbus,
which place General Grant’s reconnoissance at that time had induced the
Confederates to believe would be the first point of attack from the
Federal army.

After the capture of Fort Henry, on the 6th of February, by which the
enemy’s communication with Columbus was intercepted, the remaining
troops were distributed, some to Fort Donelson, some to Nashville and
other points; and a work of indiscriminate destruction of the buildings
and property in the town commenced. The beautiful iron railway bridge,
and the wooden turnpike bridge over the Barren river were first
destroyed. The railway bridge over the Green river, some forty miles to
the north-east, had long since been burned, and the forces of General
Buell had been deterred from crossing that stream up to the present
time.

On the 11th of February, however, General Mitchell’s division, encamped
on Bacon creek, seven miles north of the Green river, were ordered to
advance on Bowling Green, and on that day marched to Camp Madison, one
mile north of the river; where receiving confirmatory information of the
retreat of the rebel forces, they hastened forward.

Thursday morning, February 13th, the division—infantry, cavalry, and
artillery, left Camp Madison for Bowling Green, forty-two miles distant,
and made twenty miles the first day. The railroad appeared to be but
little injured, but all the buildings were destroyed. The roads the
first day were in splendid order, but much obstructed by trees, which
were, however, speedily removed by two companies of mechanics and
engineers, who swung their axes with energy, and were never delayed over
fifteen minutes by any impediment. The ponds along the road were filled
with dead horses and cattle, so long as any cattle were to be found to
fill them. The troops rested at noon at Cave City, which was very nearly
destroyed. On the second day they started again for Bowling Green. The
next morning was cold, with about an inch and a half of snow, but they
were up betimes and on their way, the Nineteenth Illinois ahead as
usual, with her blue flag waving triumphantly. The road was obstructed,
and filled with signs of the rapid retreat of Hindman’s forces.

Hearing repeatedly that the railroad bridge over Barren river was
destroyed, and that the Confederates would not stand this side of the
river, Colonel Turchin ordered the cavalry and one battery ahead. The
ranks opened to the right and left, and Captain Loomis’ battery dashed
by in fine style toward Bowling Green. The men hearing the cannon roar,
hurried on, and reached the banks of the river opposite Bowling Green,
about two o’clock, making the forty-two miles in about thirty-seven
hours. After the firing commenced they seized every team along the road,
and had the knapsacks drawn by horses the rest of the way, much to the
relief of tired shoulders. General Turchin fired the first shell into
the town, and immediately three regiments were seen scampering to the
cars, and putting off in great confusion.

But though within a mile of Bowling Green, they were powerless to
interfere, for there was Barren river, wide and unfordable, between
them, and both bridges destroyed. The Texan Rangers soon began to fire
all the public buildings. Fifty men under Captain Scott, got ready to
cross in a little skiff by parties, and try to drive out the few who
remained to perform this work, but the General would not allow it. They
then pitched their tents and prepared to wait until a bridge could be
erected. When snugly tucked in their blankets, the assembly beat to
arms, and the brigade was soon in ranks. They expected to march to town,
but were put on the back track some three miles.

They left the main road, and soon came to the river, where they built
fires and rested as well as possible. Here the repairs of an old wherry
were completed, and they crossed the river, protected by artillery.
There was a slight snow falling, and it was uncomfortably cold. The
Nineteenth and Twenty-fourth, Hecker’s Illinois, crossed first. The men
suffered intensely from cold, but declared that they had rather be shot
than frozen, and pushed on. But no enemy appeared, and the tired
soldiers soon surrounded the fires, some of which had been burning for
several days. All the public buildings and several warehouses, filled
with pork, beef, coffee, etc., were destroyed. A pile of grain thirty
feet by twenty, was burning when the Federal troops arrived. Four
engines and several cars were also burnt. The cars had been carrying
away provision for a week, but still immense quantities were destroyed.
Boxes of guns, large numbers of bowie-knives roughly fashioned of iron,
every conceivable kind of shooting apparatus, and all sorts of hardware
for cooking and other uses were found in immense quantities.

Bowling Green is a town of considerable commercial importance, and
possesses many large stores and warehouses. The majority of the
inhabitants were loyal in their sentiments, though many influential
citizens sympathized with the rebellion; but when the work of
destruction commenced, no discrimination was allowed, and all were made
sufferers. The unexpected arrival of General Mitchell’s army, and the
terror of his artillery, drove the rebels from the town before their
incendiary intentions were fully consummated, and much private property
was saved which would else have been consumed by the flames.

When General Buckner was exercising military sovereignty in southern
Kentucky, one of his proclamations demanded that every man in Wright
county should deliver to him at his headquarters, one gun, or twenty
dollars in money, under the penalty of fifty dollars’ fine, or ninety
days’ imprisonment. In response to this edict, a motley collection of
old squirrel and shot-guns were added to the Confederate stores, and
with other treasures were packed in buildings at Bowling Green. A hasty
evacuation of that stronghold having become a “military necessity,”
these buildings were fired by the retreating rebels, and among the ruins
which met the curious gaze of General Mitchell’s men when they entered
the town, were scattered piles of the iron parts of these guns, in
several places a foot thick.




                       CAPTURE OF FORT DONELSON.

                         FEBRUARY 13–16, 1862.


Bravely as the army of the West had sustained the honor of the Union,
the crowning glory of taking Fort Donelson remained to be accomplished.
To attack a strongly-defended fort, formidable by nature and rendered
almost impregnable by military art, was a work of extreme danger, nay,
of impossibility to less resolute men.

[Illustration:

  ATTACK ON FORT DONELSON BY THE FEDERAL GUNBOATS.
]

[Illustration:

  THE SURRENDER OF FORT DONELSON.
]

The relative positions of Fort Henry and Donelson, the former on the
Tennessee river and the latter on the Cumberland, should be clearly
understood, in order to comprehend the difficulties of this undertaking.

Fort Henry had been occupied by Federal troops, and it became necessary
to effect the reduction of Fort Donelson, in order to open the river to
the navigation of the national flotilla, and to reach Nashville, the
capital of Tennessee.

The surrender of Fort Henry took place on the 6th of February. One of
the gunboats, the Essex, being disabled, was obliged to return to Cairo
for repairs, while the Lexington, Conestoga and Tyler, returned to the
Ohio, in order to reach the Cumberland river to make the ascent to Fort
Donelson. Commodore Foote having completed his preparations, left Cairo
on the 11th of February for the scene of action—the Carondelet having
previously been sent forward to reconnoitre the position.

On the same day General Grant issued his orders for the movement of the
land forces in two divisions, on the following morning. The distance
from Fort Henry to Fort Donelson across the land lying between the two
rivers, is fourteen miles. There are several roads running from Fort
Henry to Dover, near which Fort Donelson was situated. The divisions
were disposed by brigades, one of which was to be thrown into Dover to
cut off the retreat of the enemy, if attempted by that route.

Fort Donelson takes its name from Andrew Jackson Donelson, a citizen of
Tennessee, and its construction was commenced as early as May, 1861. It
occupied the best position for defence on the Cumberland river, standing
on the summit of a fine slope, rising to the height of one hundred and
fifty feet from the river, on its right bank, and mounted sixteen guns.
There were two water batteries, one of which was about twenty or thirty
feet above the river, and defended by nine pieces, eight
thirty-two-pound guns, and one ten-inch columbiad. The second was some
sixty feet above, and was mounted with one ten-inch columbiad, and two
thirty-two pound carronades.

Both these batteries were sunken or excavated in the hill-side. In the
lower one, strong traverses were left between the guns, to secure them
against an enfilading fire. The elevation above the water at the time of
the gunboat attack, gave them a fine command of the river, and made the
task of attacking them in front an arduous one. The range of the guns in
arc, was, however, quite limited.

The third occupied the summit of the hill, and mounted four 128-pound
guns. The camp was behind the fort on the hill, but within range of
gunboats on the river.


                           THE NAVAL ATTACK.

On the night of February 11th, the St. Louis, (the flag-ship,)
Louisville, and Pittsburg, sailed from Cairo. The Carondelet, as already
stated, had been dispatched a day or two in advance, and at Paducah, on
the noon of the 12th, the fleet was joined by the Conestoga and Tyler.
Of these the three first were iron-clad vessels. From Paducah the fleet
was accompanied by sixteen transports, carrying six thousand infantry,
and cavalry and artillery.

The fleet followed the flag-ship of Commodore Foote, as they turned out
of the Ohio, and began the ascent of the Cumberland. Passing onward from
the Ohio, sweeping through Kentucky and Tennessee up to the western
boundaries of Virginia, the fleet carried the national ensign, which was
met with continual cheers and responses from the people on the banks.

About four o’clock in the afternoon, a messenger steamer, the Alps, met
the fleet, with a dispatch from General Grant, requesting all haste to
be made, as the gunboats were anxiously expected. Putting on steam, the
Alps took the St. Louis and Louisville in tow, leaving the transports to
hasten as rapidly as they could be urged. The former arrived within two
miles of the fort at twelve o’clock, on the night of Thursday, the 13th.

On the morning of that day, the Carondelet, by order of General Grant,
had bombarded the fort, and single-handed, commenced the attack on the
works. On the previous day she had advanced and fired eight shots, but
without drawing out any reply. The attack of the 13th was differently
met by the fort, as the shells were briskly responded to, and a vigorous
fire was maintained for two hours. The Carondelet kept her bows hard on
the fort, carefully guarding against presenting her broadside to the
enemy. She fired one hundred and twenty-eight shots in ninety-five
minutes. At the end of that time, a ball from one of the 128-pound guns
entered her port-bow, and struck a portion of her machinery. Six men
were slightly wounded by the splinters which flew from the ship’s
timbers. She retired beyond the range of the guns, to ascertain the
amount of damage, and in the afternoon, after repairing, was again
ordered to the charge, and fired a number of shots, but without sensible
effect.

The morning of the 14th found the flotilla lying in the wake of the
flag-ship. The transports had arrived, and the troops, with the
artillery, were landed about two miles from the fort. The arrival of the
fleet, and the thousands of determined soldiers, inspired the troops
already at the scene of action with new vigor; long and tumultuous
cheers came down the hills from the army under General Grant, which
could be seen in the distance, watching the movements of the fleet.
General Grant and his staff had gone on board the St. Louis, before
daylight, and an attack by the land forces was agreed upon, to be made
as soon as the signal gun should be given from the river. Accordingly,
at two o’clock, P. M., all the vessels comprising the flotilla, the
iron-clad boats St. Louis, Carondelet, Pittsburg, and Louisville, and
the two wooden boats, Conestoga and Tyler, got under way. They were then
about two miles from the fort. The line of battle was immediately
formed, the flag-ship taking the extreme right, with the Louisville,
Pittsburg, and Carondelet at the left, four abreast; the Conestoga and
Tyler, not being iron clad, remained in the rear, about a quarter of a
mile. The fleet proceeded at a speed of about three miles an hour, up
the river. At twenty-five minutes to three o’clock they reached the
termination of a long range of woods to the right, and came in full view
of the fort.

The fortifications were distinctly visible, consisting of three tiers of
frowning batteries, on the slope of a steep hill, one hundred and fifty
feet in height. About half-past two o’clock, the enemy opened fire from
a battery about twenty feet above water level, by discharging a
32-pounder, but the shot fell far short. This was followed by another
ball of larger dimensions, which also fell short. The Union men were
anxious to show the enemy a specimen of their fighting power, but the
Commodore would not permit them to fire a gun for fifteen minutes, until
they got within certain range of the fort. At a few minutes before three
o’clock, the St. Louis opened the battle on the national side, and the
other boats quickly followed. For a while all the shot fell short of the
mark.

The boats kept advancing slowly and steadily for about half an hour,
when the order was given to slack the engines, so as to prevent them
from coming in too close range. The firing then increased to a terrific
rate on both sides. The enemy poured 32 and 64-pound balls into the
vessels with great effect, and the gunners returned their 8-inch shell
and 64-pound rifle balls with unusual skill. In the heat of the action,
a shot from the enemy’s water battery carried away the flagstaff of the
St. Louis; almost the next shot took the chimney guys of the same boat.
A well sent ball from the St. Louis soon struck the flagstaff of the
enemy, which was on the top of the hill behind the batteries. This
terrible fire lasted about half an hour, when a 64-pound ball from the
middle battery cut the tiller ropes of the gunboat Louisville, rendering
her steering apparatus unmanageable. About the same time a shot entered
one of the windows of the pilot-house of the Carondelet, mortally
wounding the pilot. Thus the control of two Union boats was in a great
degree lost. Shortly after this, a 32-pound ball penetrated the
pilot-house of the St. Louis, mortally wounding one of the pilots,
injuring two other pilots, and severely wounding Flag-officer Foote.
There were five men in the pilot-house at the time, only one of whom
escaped injury. The room was filled with pieces of the broken wheel,
chains, room furniture and rubbish of every sort; there was no one there
to take the helm save the Commodore—no chance to call another to his
aid—so, equal to the emergency, the gallant old Commodore seized the
remaining handles of the wheel, and for a quarter of an hour acted the
double part of commander and pilot, and at last, when compelled to fall
back, he kept bow to the foe, and gave his orders as calmly and coolly
as when first entering the action.

At about the middle of the engagement, a 32-pound rifle shot took away
the flagstaff and Commodore’s pennant. In a moment half a dozen men
sprang out of the ports, caught the mutilated staff upon their
shoulders, hoisted the “blue flag” to its place, where they stood and
held it for several minutes, in the face of a most murderous fire.

Thus three powerful vessels were disabled by accidents that do not
happen twice in a hundred times. The men on board were unwilling to give
up the fight. The enemy had been driven from the lower battery, and
their fire had slackened perceptibly. What remained to be done? To fight
in such a current, with unmanageable boats, would, the Commodore knew,
be worse than folly. Reluctantly, therefore, he ordered them to fall
back.

The vessels then stopped their engines and floated slowly from their
positions. They had been within two hundred yards of the fort. The enemy
soon saw the condition of the fleet, and redoubled their fire. They ran
to the lower batteries and opened them on the retiring vessels with
terrific force. One of the guns of the Carondelet had burst in the
middle of the action, and the Pittsburg had received two balls below
water mark, causing her to leak rapidly. But they replied well to the
reinvigorated foe, and fired the last shot.

The fleet retired in good order, and anchored two miles below the fort.
The injuries to the gunboats were not very great. The principal damage
to the St. Louis was that sustained by the shot entering her
pilot-house. She was struck 61 times; the Pittsburg 47; the Carondelet
54; and the Louisville about 40. The enemy fired about 500 shots.

The fleet fired a little more than 300, about 75 of which were 8-inch
shells.

The demeanor of Commodore Foote during the engagement was the subject of
admiration with every man in the fleet. His countenance was as placid
and his voice as mild in the heat of the action as if he had been
engaged in social conversation. He stood in the pilot-house for a long
time, watching the effect of every shot. When he saw a shell burst
inside of the fort, he instantly commended the deliberate aim of the
marksman, by a message through his speaking tube. When the balls fell
short, he expressed his dissatisfaction in such words as “A little
further, man; you are falling too short.” During a part of the action he
was on the gun-deck, superintending the care of the wounded. In the end,
nothing but the pilot’s assurance that his vessel could not be managed
with her broken wheel, induced him to consent to a withdrawal.

[Illustration: [Map]]

Incidents on board the Louisville were not wanting. Captain Dove had
just complimented one of the gunners on a splendid shot, when the shot
that played such havoc entered his port, and completely severed the
gunner in twain, scattering his blood and brains over Captain Dove’s
person. But the Captain never blanched; he only wiped his face, and in
an instant was superintending the replacement of another gun as if
nothing had happened. Cool, brave and determined, he was throughout the
action a support to his men and an honor to his country.


                            THE LAND ATTACK.

In addition to the two water batteries already described, a third had
been commenced, but was not at the time completed. The fort stood on a
hill, and within its ample lines nearly a hundred large and substantial
log-houses had been erected for quarters. In order to prevent any
lodgment of an opposing force on the hills back of the fort, it was
necessary to construct a line of defenses around the fort, at the
distance of a mile, and in some places more than a mile, from the
principal work. These outworks extended from a creek on the north side
of the works to another which entered a quarter of a mile below. Both of
these streams were filled with backwater from the swollen river, for the
distance of three-quarters of a mile from their mouths. This chain of
breastworks and the miry bed of the creeks formed a most complete
impediment to the marching of an artillery force within sight of the
main fort. This line of works was not less than three miles in length,
breast high, and formed from a ditch on either side, so as to answer the
purpose of rifle-pits and parapets. At intervals on every elevation
platforms had been constructed and mounted with howitzers and light
field pieces. Such were the works, defended by from 20,000 to 25,000
men, that the national troops were determined to take by assault.

Early on the morning of the 12th of February, the national troops left
Fort Henry with two days’ rations in their haversacks, without tents or
wagons, except such as were necessary to convey a surplus of commissary
stores and ammunition, and ambulances for the sick.

The expedition under the command of Brigadier-General U. S. Grant, was
divided into three columns—the division under Brigadier-General
McClernand, taking the road from Fort Henry to Dover, running to the
south of the enemy’s position; the second division, under command of
Brigadier-General C. F. Smith, taking the direct or telegraph road to
the fort; the third division, subsequently placed under the lead of
Brigadier-General L. Wallace, being sent round by Paducah and Smithland,
ascending the Cumberland, under the escort of the gunboats. Each of
these divisions consisted of about ten regiments of infantry, batteries,
and cavalry.

_First Division, Brigadier-General McClernand._—_1st Brigade_, Col.
Oglesby, acting.—8th Illinois, Lieut. Col. Rhodes; 18th Illinois, Col.
Lawler; 29th Illinois, Col. Reardon; 13th Illinois, Col. Dennis; 31st
Illinois, Col. J. A. Logan; Schwartz’s battery; Dresser’s battery; 4
battalions Illinois cavalry. _2d Brigade_, Col. W. H. L. Wallace,
acting.—11th Illinois, Lieut. Col. Hart; 20th Illinois, Col. Marsh; 48th
Illinois, Col. Smith; 49th Illinois, Col. Hainey; Taylor’s battery;
McAllister’s battery; 4th and 7th Illinois cavalry, Cols. Kellogg and
Dickey.

_Second Division, Brigadier-General C. F. Smith._—_1st Brigade_, Col.
Cook, acting.—7th Illinois, 50th Illinois, 12th Iowa; 13th Missouri,
Col. Wright; 52d Indiana; 3 batteries Missouri 1st artillery, Maj.
Cavender commanding; Capts. Richardson, Stone, and Walker. _2d Brigade_,
Col. Lauman, acting.—7th Iowa, Lieut.-Col. Parrott; 2d Iowa, Col.
Tuttle; 14th Iowa, Col. Shaw; 25th Indiana, Col. Veatch; 56th Indiana.

_Third Division, Brigadier-General Lewis Wallace._—_1st Brigade_, Col.
Croft, acting.—17th Kentucky, 25th Kentucky, 31st Indiana, 44th Indiana,
Col. Hugh B. Reed. _2d Brigade_, Col. Thayer, acting.—1st Nebraska,
Lieut. Col. McCord; 13th Missouri, Col. Wright; 48th Ohio, Col.
Sullivan; 58th Ohio, Col. Bausenwein; Willett’s Chicago battery.

By nine o’clock all the forces were on the march. The division of
General McClernand took the upper or southern road to Dover. The
division of General Smith proceeded by the northern or telegraph road,
running directly to the fort. The route lay through broken and
undulating lands. Small streams of the purest water were crossed at
every ravine. The hills were in places covered with green pines and
tall, heavy timber. The weather was mild and spring-like; the men in
admirable spirits, marching in regular order, and the surrounding
scenery almost tropical in its luxuriance. At about two o’clock in the
afternoon the advanced skirmishers of McClernand’s division came in
sight of the enemy’s tents stretching between the hill upon which the
fort was situated, and the next, on Dover ledge.

Word was passed back to General Grant that the enemy and his camp had
been sighted. General Grant at once ordered up the rear of the column.
Dresser’s battery was posted on an eminence overlooking the tents, and a
few shells sent into the camp. There was a general and promiscuous
scattering of men from the camps into the earthworks to right and left.
General Grant immediately ordered the division of General Smith into
line of battle on the ravine back of the main elevation. A column of men
was pushed up on the left of the fort. Scouts returned saying that the
breastworks could be discovered on the extreme left. An hour or two was
then spent in reconnoitering along the various hills surrounding the
enemy’s position.

This preliminary skirmish was soon over, and the enemy had fallen back
within his intrenchments, when the shades of night fell upon the two
armies. Many of the Federal soldiers, in anticipation of an engagement,
had relieved themselves of their overcoats, blankets, and haversacks,
and were altogether unprepared for the experience of the night. But
cheerfully kindling their camp-fires, under a mild and genial
temperature, they gathered around the cheerful blaze and gradually fell
into slumberous dreams of home, of conquest, or of love.

During the night the enemy made a sortie on the extreme right of the
Federal lines, which by its suddenness created some confusion for the
time, but he was repulsed and compelled to retire.

On Thursday, the 13th, the attack commenced. The morning sun rose
brightly on the scene. The men were soon engaged in cooking what
provisions could be obtained. Several hogs running at large in the woods
had been shot for breakfast, and a sumptuous meal was made from their
flesh. At sunrise the firing of riflemen commenced. The enemy could be
descried behind his breastworks. The most available positions were
selected for batteries, and by eight o’clock a regular exchange of shot
and shell had commenced across the ravine which separated the
combatants. Taylor’s battery was on the extreme right, next came
Schwartz’s, further to the left. Further still was a section of an
Illinois battery. Across a deep ravine and in the centre of the position
was Captain Richardson’s First Missouri Light Artillery, on the point of
a ridge provokingly near the enemy’s lines. Higher upon the same rise
was McAlister’s battery of twenty-four pound howitzers, and on the left
could be heard at intervals an Iowa battery.

The long established form of opening the fight by a contest of
sharpshooters and artillery was observed. For two hours nothing was to
be heard but the loud thuds of cannon, with the relief of a sharp crack
of rifles, and an occasional report of a musket, which in the distance
could hardly be distinguished from a field piece. Major Cavender, of the
Missouri First, sighted his twenty-pound Parrott rifle guns. Two or
three shots had been sent whizzing through the trees, when “clash” came
a shot in front of the piece. Without moving a muscle the major
completed his task, and bang! went a response. Bang went another from
the sister-piece under the intrepid captain. A second was received from
the fort, passing over the hill, exploding just in the rear, a third
burst directly over head, and the combat was kept up with spirit.
Dresser’s battery poured out shell from his large howitzers in splendid
style. The enemy held a slight advantage in position, and had the range
with accuracy. The shells were falling fast around the batteries, doing
however but little injury. A few minutes and a round shot passed over
the gun, and carried away the shoulder and part of the breast of
artilleryman Bernhard of Richardson’s battery, killing him almost
instantly. The captain shifted his position three times during the
morning, whenever the enemy got his range with too much accuracy.

On the extreme right Schwartz and Taylor were blazing away fearlessly.
The ground between them and the intrenchments was nearly cleared of
trees, and they could observe by the smoke the position of each other
with accuracy. The firing from the batteries in McClernand’s division
was continuous. An attempt had been made by the enemy to capture
Taylor’s battery, which had been gallantly repulsed. The rebels had
reached close upon the battery, and only an incessant shower of canister
saved it from capture, the infantry not being formed in position to
support it effectually. The Twentieth Illinois came up in time to drive
the enemy into their works.

In the afternoon General McClernand determined to make a formidable
assault of a redoubt of the enemy, fronting the centre of his right. The
redoubt was the only one which could be distinctly seen, owing to timber
and undergrowth. At this point the ground was for the most part void of
large timber, the barren extending even beyond the road on the ridge
which the Union troops passed. The batteries of this redoubt had a very
perfect range, and gave the troops considerable uneasiness, by blazing
away at them whenever they passed over the brow of the hill. Three
regiments were detailed for the work—the Forty-eighth, Seventeenth and
Forty-ninth Illinois. They advanced in line of battle order, the
Forty-ninth, Colonel Morrison, on the right, the Seventeenth, under
command of Major Smith, in the centre, and the Forty-eighth, Colonel
Hainley, on the left. Colonel Morrison, as senior Colonel, led the
attack. The advance was a most beautiful one. With skirmishers arrayed
in front, the three regiments swept down the hill, over a knoll, down a
ravine, and up the high hill on which the redoubt was situated, some two
hundred and fifty or three hundred feet in height, covered with brush
and stumps, all the time receiving a galling fire of grape, shell and
musketry, with a precision which would have done them credit on the
parade ground. The breastworks were nearly reached, when Colonel
Morrison, while gallantly leading his men, was struck by a musket ball.
The captain of the company on his right was also killed, while the
Forty-ninth fell into some confusion; but unappalled the Seventeenth
still gallantly pressed forward and penetrated even to the very foot of
the works. But it was not in the power of man to scale the abattis
before them. Brush piled upon brush, with sharp points, fronted them
wherever they turned; so, after a few interchanges of musketry with the
swarming regiments concentrated there, the word for retiring was given.
It was done in good order, by filing off to the left and obliqueing into
the woods below; but many a gallant soldier was left behind underneath
the intrenchments he had vainly sought to mount. They were not, however,
destined to die unavenged. Scarcely, had their retiring columns got out
of range, ere Taylor’s Chicago battery opened on the swarming rebel
masses with shell and shrapnell. The effect was fearful. Each gun was
aimed by the captain himself, and when its black mouth belched out
sudden thunder, winrows of dead men fell in its track.

While this heavy firing had been heard on the right, General Smith, had
ordered the enemy to be engaged on the left. The Twenty-fifth Indiana,
at the head of a brigade, led the way. They had reached a position on
the brow of a hill where the successful assault was afterwards made, and
were met by the enemy in force, who swarmed behind the works, pouring a
deadly hail of bullets and grape into them. The leading regiment broke
in disorder after sustaining a hot fire, and the whole line fell back
out of range. The object of the sortie had been accomplished, and the
enemy’s forces drawn from the other side, but the advantage did not
result, as might have been anticipated, in the occupation of the fort on
the right by General McClernand.

Six companies of the famous regiment of riflemen, raised by Colonel
Birge, accompanied the expedition from Fort Henry, and two companies
afterwards arrived by the transports. This was a corps of picked men
skilled in the use of the rifle, drawn from the North-west.

These hardy pioneers started out in the morning, with a hard biscuit in
their pocket and a rifle on their shoulder, for the rebel earthworks,
where they remained until relieved by a fresh gang. So adventurous were
they, that many of them crept within fifty yards of the rifle-pits and
exchanged words as well as shots with the enemy.

One piece in front of Dresser’s battery was kept in silence during the
morning by the sharpshooters picking off their gunners. At last a shell
from a Union battery, falling short, drove them away. One valiant
southerner, to prove his bravery, jumped into the rampart to take aim;
in an instant he was pierced by three balls, and fell out of the
intrenchment, where he lay till nightfall.

The firing for the rest of the day was slow, and appeared by general
consent to be abandoned. The Unionists seemed to have failed in every
attempt on the fort. Wounded men were being brought in on stretchers;
some limped along, supported by comrades, others staggered forward with
bleeding hands and battered heads tied in handkerchiefs. The ambulances
had brought in the maimed and seriously wounded. In the gray dusk of
evening men came forth with spades to dig the graves of their
fellow-soldiers, whose remains, stiffened in death, were lying under the
pale stars.

Hardly had the camp-fires been kindled for the night when a drizzling
shower set in, which soon turned into a steady fall of rain. The wind
grew suddenly colder. The weather, hitherto so pleasant, was chilled in
an hour to a wintry blast. Snow began to fall, and the mercury sank
below freezing point.

Many of the soldiers had lost their overcoats and blankets during the
day. Not a tent, except hospital tents, in the command. Provisions
growing very scarce—the muddy, wet clothing freezing upon the chilled
limbs of the hungry soldiers. It was a most comfortless night. Not five
houses could be found within as many miles, and these were used as
hospitals. Various expedients were devised to ward off the cold.
Saplings were bent down and twigs interwoven into a shelter; leaves
piled up made a kind of roof to keep off the snow. Large fires were
kindled, and the men lay with their feet to the fire. The victims who
perished of cold, exposure, hunger and neglect, on this night, will fill
up a long page in the mortality record of that eventful siege.

On Friday, the conflict was maintained only by the pickets and
sharpshooters, General Grant having concluded to await the arrival of
additional forces, before assaulting the works.

Hitherto the investment had been made by the divisions of Generals
McClernand and Smith, about ten thousand men each, including the cavalry
and artillery. A third division had been sent up the Cumberland, and
should, by reasonable calculation, have been opposite Fort Henry on
Wednesday night. Here was Friday morning and no transports arrived. What
could have befallen them? General L. Wallace, who had been left in
command at Fort Henry, was summoned over, and arrived on Friday evening
with two regiments of his brigade. Couriers were seen dashing along from
the headquarters to the point where the boats were expected to land.
About ten o’clock came the joyful intelligence that the gunboat fleet,
with fifteen transports, had landed five miles below the fort. The
troops from Fort Henry were pouring in, and close upon them came the
troops from the boats. The men had heard something of the fighting, and
moved up in splendid order, expecting to be marched directly into
battle.

At about half-past two o’clock the sound as of thunder, with long
reverberations in the distance, told that the river guns had at last
opened their mouths, and were paying their compliments grandly to the
rebel batteries. Now and then could be seen in the distance, high up in
the air, a sudden puff of white smoke, which sprang as if from nothing,
slowly curling in graceful folds, and melting away in a snow-white
cloud; it was a bursting shell, instantly followed by the rumble of the
gun from which it had been sent. The loud roar of the cannon kept
growing thicker and faster. The heavy columbiads and Dahlgrens in the
fort were returning the fire. One, two, three, and then half a dozen at
once! The terrible game of death becomes wildly exciting!

The gunboats were advancing—the bombardment had fairly begun. The cheers
went up in ten thousand voices. The death-dealing bolts of Fort Henry
were falling thick and fast into Fort Donelson. But little did the
besiegers know what protection and defence nature had laid against the
ingenuity of art, which the insurgents had seized upon to accomplish
their purpose! No one considered the importance of those great natural
traverses and curtains of rock which had been thrown up by the primeval
subterranean fires, nor what bomb-proofs and lunettes the waters of a
thousand years had worn into the sides of those hills. The area of the
place was so large that nearly the whole force could be removed from the
water front, and thus leave the shells to explode against the bleak hill
sides, or crush through the deserted huts of the enemy.

Meantime an occasional shot from the batteries surrounding the outer
lines of defence must have told upon the enemy on the other side. The
enemy replied but feebly. The entire morning had been in anxious
expectancy, neither party being willing to risk the chances of another
trial of valor. The weather was keen and frosty, the roads slippery and
clogged with stiff mud.

Saturday, which was destined to witness the grand _denouement_ of the
painful tragedies enacted about Donelson, was cold, damp and cheerless.
The enemy, during the night, had transferred several of their batteries
to portions of their works, within a few hundred feet of which the
extreme right wing of the Federals was resting. Upon the first coming of
dawn, these batteries suddenly opened on the Ninth, Eighteenth,
Twenty-ninth, Thirtieth and Thirty-first regiments, comprising Oglesby’s
brigade, which had the advance. Simultaneously with the opening of the
batteries, a force of about twelve thousand infantry and a regiment of
cavalry was hurled against the brigade with a vigor which, made against
less steady and well-disciplined troops, must surely have resulted in
their entire demolition.

Sudden and unexpected as was this sally on the part of the enemy, it did
not find the gallant Illinoisans unprepared to meet them. The attack was
made in columns of regiments, which poured in upon the little band from
no less than three different directions. Every regiment of the brigade
found itself opposed to two, and in many cases to no less than four
different regiments. Undismayed, however, by the greatly superior force
of the enemy, and unsupported by adequate artillery, the brigade not
only held their own, but upon two occasions actually drove the rebels
fairly into their intrenchments, but only to be pressed back again into
their former position. At last having expended every round of their
ammunition, they were obliged to retire and give way to advancing
regiments of Colonel W. H. L. Wallace’s brigade, the Eleventh,
Twentieth, Seventeenth, Forty-fifth, Forty-eighth Illinois, and
Forty-ninth Indiana regiments.

By rapid firing from the two batteries of Taylor and Schwartz, the enemy
was driven back. The Union regiments which had suffered so much were
withdrawn. The enemy had by this time concentrated their broken troops
for another attack. General McClernand had already prepared for the
emergency. Anticipating that an attempt would be made to force a passage
through, he ordered a brigade to the rear and extreme right to form
behind the regiments then in front.

An hour had elapsed when the enemy returned in a dense mass, renewing
the fight. The battery of Captain Schwartz seemed to be the object of
their attack. On they came, pell mell, with deafening volleys of fire.
The Union batteries, well nigh exhausted of canister, poured a storm of
shell into their ranks. Ammunition caissons were sent back in haste to
get a fresh supply of canister. The Ninth, Eighteenth, Thirtieth and
Forty-first were the next regiments to be brought up. The crest of the
hill was contested with variable success for a full hour, when the enemy
was finally driven back. The line of battle was so much confused that no
connected account of the movements can be detailed. The utmost bravery
was displayed on both sides, until the struggle degenerated into a wild
fierce skirmish. The rebels finally retired a third time.

The Union men had expended their ammunition. It was during this lull,
and before the men could realize the fact that they had driven the enemy
before them, that the fourth and last attempt was made to seize the
battery. The horses being shot, the enemy succeeded in gaining
possession of the battery of Captain Schwartz, and were on the point of
turning the guns on the Federal troops, when Captain Willett’s Chicago
battery, which had just toiled up fresh from Fort Henry, arrived on the
ground and poured in a perfect storm of canister, just in time to save
the day. The rebels fell back in disorder, dragging the guns of Schwartz
with them down the hill, and gained entrance to the fort before the
Federals could overtake them. Some eager regiments followed them to the
embankments, a few men climbing over, who were driven back for want of
support.

The regiments which suffered most in this morning’s engagement were the
Eighteenth and Eleventh Illinois; next them, the Thirty-first and
Eighth. The expenditure of ammunition must have been excessive, on the
hypothesis that each man had his cartridge-box full on going into
action. Forty rounds of the standard cartridge is enough to fight with,
and more than enough to carry with other accoutrements of battle.

There were many instances of men who displayed the utmost heroism in
this action—some refused to be called off the field, fighting to the
last moment; others returned after having their wounds dressed. One of
the artillerymen, who received a wound, walked to the hospital, a mile
or more, had the ball extracted, and then insisted on going back to his
battery. The surgeon refused, when he quaintly said: “Come, come, put on
some of your glue and let me go back.”

General McClernand, who had been a conspicuous mark during the whole of
this fight, bore himself with firmness, exhibiting great decision and
calmness in the most arduous situation. The tumult on the left having
subsided, he sent a messenger back to General Grant to know if the left
wing of General Smith was secure; if so he was ready to advance. As the
day waned, an occasional shot was to be heard from the gunboats, but no
satisfactory account could be received of their operations. A lull
followed the storm. Both armies were preparing for the grand _coup de
main_, by which Fort Donelson was to be taken.

It was resolved to storm the fort. The honor of accomplishing this
difficult and perilous exploit on the left wing was given to General
Smith. When Colonel Lauman led his brigade in solid columns up the steep
sides of the hill, he drove the enemy from his entrenchments, pouring a
fearful volley into their disorganized and broken ranks. The national
ensign was immediately flung out from the earthworks, and greeted with
deafening cheers from ten thousand loyal voices.

The shades of night cast their canopy over the contending hosts, and
compelled the Federal commander to delay the completion of his victory
till morning. Soon after daylight, the Federal columns advanced in
battle array, prepared to storm the works at all points, when their eyes
were greeted with innumerable white flags, thrown out by the enemy at
every threatened position.

What followed may be told in few words. The enemy seeing that the
Unionists had gained one of his strongest positions, and successfully
repulsed him in his most daring attempts to raise the siege, took
advantage of the darkness, and called a council of war, in which it was
determined to surrender. With all possible haste some 7,000 troops were
dispatched up the river by night. The rebel Generals Floyd and Pillow
made their escape. The fort, with all its contents, fell into the
conquerors’ hands. More than 13,000 prisoners, Brigadier-General
Buckner, with twenty Colonels and other officers in proportion;
sixty-five cannon, forty-eight field and seventeen siege guns, a million
and a half dollars in stores, provisions, and equipage, twenty thousand
stand of arms—was glorious result, purchased at comparatively small
loss. The Federal loss in killed and wounded was 2,200; that of the
rebels 1,275.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES WADSWORTH. WEBER. SEDGWICK. LYON. M’COOK.
KENLEY. HUNTER. ELLSWORTH. FREMONT. CLAY.]

At the storming of Fort Donelson many acts of personal valor might be
recorded. An instance of reckless gallantry, and fortitude under a most
painful surgical operation, that of Hamilton, a son of Professor Leiber,
is worthy of record. This young man was twice wounded in the battle of
Fort Donelson. The first was a flesh wound, of which he made nothing.
Presently, however, he was struck by a Minie ball in the same arm; this
shattered his elbow, with the bones above and below, and he sank to the
ground, fainting with loss of blood. He was picked up towards night,
carried to a house, and thence, over a rough road, in an army wagon, to
the river bank, a distance of three miles, which necessarily caused the
greatest suffering. Arrived at the river bank, he was put on board a
boat and conveyed with other wounded to an hospital, where his arm was
amputated. When the operation was over, the brave young fellow’s first
words were, “How long will it be before I can rejoin my company?” At
that time young Leiber was a Lieutenant of the Ninth Illinois regiment.
He was appointed aid-de-camp by General Halleck soon after the battle of
Donelson as a reward for his great bravery.




                      THE OCCUPATION OF NASHVILLE.

                           FEBRUARY 25, 1862.


After the surrender of Fort Donelson, on the 16th of February, it became
evident to the Confederate leaders that the cities of Nashville and
Memphis, and other important positions must soon fall into the hands of
the victorious Federal army. Public meetings were held at both these
cities, in which it was recommended to defend them to the last
extremity, and if necessary to prevent their occupancy by the Union
troops, many of the more violent and reckless of the military determined
that they should be burned, and every description of property destroyed.
At Nashville, the Governor, Isham G. Harris, pledged himself to “shed
his blood, fight like a lion, and die like a martyr,” rather than submit
to the enemy; and at the same time efforts were made, but with little
success, to organize additional forces for defence.

During the progress of the siege at Fort Donelson, dispatches were sent
to Nashville, announcing a series of rebel successes, and on Saturday
night information was conveyed that the Federals had again been defeated
both on land and water, but they had been reinforced and might renew the
attack in the morning. With these hopeful and exulting assurances, the
city rested in peace, confident that the light of the morning would open
upon a glorious victory for the rebel arms.

Early on the morning of Sunday the first rumors of this heavy calamity
to the rebel cause had been conveyed to the leaders in Nashville. At
first, suppressed whispers and grave countenances indicated that
something important had transpired. But the people generally were
confident and hopeful as on the evening before, and anticipated that any
hour of the day would give the signal for a grand jubilee and rejoicing.
The time for public service in the churches drew near, and the people
repaired to their several places of worship. The churches were partly
filled and the streets crowded with the passing multitude, when a
startling rumor broke the peaceful stillness of the day. The Federals
were victorious! Fort Donelson had surrendered! Fifteen thousand
Confederate prisoners had laid down their arms to the invaders! Fear,
added to imagination, ran riot in the town.

It was said that the Federal troops had already reached Robertson, a
place about twenty-five miles from Nashville, connected by railroad, and
that the gunboats were at Clarksville, on the river, on their way to the
city. Governor Harris, taking advantage of his early information, had
hastily convened the members of the Legislature, then in session at
Nashville, which had met, and adjourned to convene at Memphis. These
circumstances becoming known, gave plausibility to the exciting rumors
of the celerity of the Federal movements, and the people were panic
stricken.

Before nightfall hundreds of citizens, singly and in families, were
making their way South, many of them having no idea why they were thus
recklessly abandoning comfortable homes, or where they were going.
Toward night it was announced that the military authorities would throw
open the public stores to all who would carry the property away.

This excitement continued throughout Sunday night, constantly gaining
strength, aided by the destruction of two gunboats which were in process
of construction—two fine New Orleans packets, the James Woods and James
Johnson, having been taken for that purpose. The army of General
Johnston commenced its retreat, encamping by regiments at convenient
points outside of the city. On Monday morning, great excitement
prevailed; the public stores were distributed to some extent among the
people, while the army and hospitals were making heavy requisitions, and
pressing all the vehicles and men that could be obtained to carry
supplies to their camp. At the same time, considerable quantities of
stores were removed to the depots for transportation south. Evening
came, and no gunboats—no Federal army from Kentucky. General Johnston
left for the South, placing General Floyd in command, assisted by
Generals Pillow and Hardee. The apprehensions of the near approach of
the enemy having been found groundless, it was determined by General
Floyd that the distribution of the stores was premature. An order was
sent to close the warehouses, and a force detailed to collect what had
been given out. This was done, so far as practicable—but on Tuesday the
distribution commenced again, and continued with slight restrictions,
under the eyes of the most judicious citizens, until Saturday morning.
Tuesday night the iron and railroad bridges across the Cumberland were
destroyed, in spite of the most earnest and persistent remonstrances of
leading citizens. The iron-bridge cost about one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars, and the railroad bridge two hundred and fifty thousand
dollars. It was one of the finest drawbridges in the country.

The scenes which were enacted during the following days, up to Monday
morning the 24th, were still more exciting. The untiring energy of the
Mayor and city authorities, who throughout this whole affair acted with
prudence and zeal, was inadequate to keep the excited people under
control.

On Sunday morning, twenty-five Federal pickets breakfasted in Edgefield,
opposite the city, and during the morning eight of them seized a little
stern-wheeled steamer that had been used as a ferry, and refused to
permit it to continue its trips. Mayor Cheatham immediately crossed in a
skiff, but found no officer with whom he could negotiate. In the
evening, Colonel Emmet, of the Fourth Ohio Cavalry arrived, and sent a
message to the Mayor, requesting his presence. The interview was
satisfactory on both sides, though the formal surrender of the city was
deferred until the arrival of General Mitchell, who was expected on
Sunday night or Monday morning.

On Monday morning the city became comparatively quiet. In the evening
Generals Buell and Mitchell arrived in Edgefield, and understanding that
the authorities had appointed a committee, consisting of the Mayor and
several of the leading citizens, he sent a message requesting an
interview. The hour of the interview was fixed at eleven o’clock, A. M.
on Tuesday. In the mean time General Nelson arrived in the city about
eight o’clock, A. M., in command of a fleet, consisting of one gunboat,
the Cairo, and eight transports. Transports continued to arrive during
the day, and at night the number reached eighteen or twenty. A large
portion of this army disembarked during the morning, and occupied the
public square, encamping in the vicinity at night. At eleven o’clock,
the committee of citizens were conveyed by order of General Buell to
Edgefield, on the steamer Hillman. They were met at the landing by
Generals Nelson and Mitchell, and escorted to General Buell’s
headquarters. The interview was an amicable one, General Buell giving
assurance that the personal liberty and property of all citizens would
be fully protected, and no State institutions of any kind interfered
with.

The first business of General Buell, after having thus established a
cordial understanding with the officers of the city, was to inaugurate
his military authority by the appointment of a Provost-Marshal, to
preserve order, and regulate the intercourse of the Union troops with
the citizens. Colonel Stanley Matthews, a highly respected and
well-known gentleman, conservative in politics, was selected for this
responsible position, an appointment which was greeted with satisfaction
by the citizens. The post-office was continued in the hands of Colonel
J. H. Markland, a native Kentuckian, and a gentleman of high character
and social standing.

General Buell immediately restored the mail facilities, which had so
long been denied the people by the rebellion, and adopted every measure
to ensure and restore confidence among the citizens. Many of them had
fled their homes during the panic, the stores and places of business
were closed, and the whole community were perfectly paralyzed during the
week that had intervened between the fall of Fort Donelson and the
occupation of the city. Eight days of terror afforded them a fearful
illustration of lawlessness and violence: and when the Federal troops
took possession, their sobriety, decorum and uprightness, amazed the
people with the contrast. The loss of many of their relatives, the deep
hostility that had been engendered in their breasts, and the doubts as
to the ultimate restoration of the Federal authority, made the
development of loyal sentiments a work of time and patience. The retreat
of the national forces from Nashville, and the withdrawal of the
protection of the Government, would be the death-warrant of any person
committing himself too openly for the Union cause; and many citizens
allowed these contending motives to restrain their welcome to the flag
under which they had so long enjoyed peace, prosperity and repose.

The government at Washington took an early opportunity to appoint a
military governor for the State of Tennessee, in the person of Hon.
ANDREW JOHNSON, a man who had long represented its people as Governor
and United States Senator.

Some of the ladies of Nashville were peculiarly ardent in their dislike
of the Union occupation, and took especial pains to avoid or sneer at
the glorious old flag which was directly hoisted in the most prominent
parts of the town.

Over the large gate at the Provost-Marshal’s splendid
headquarters—Elliott’s female school—a Union flag was hoisted. A very
ardent secesh lady, who wished to see Colonel Matthews, was about to
pass through the gate, when looking up she beheld the proud flag
streaming on the breeze. Starting back horror-struck, she held up her
hands and exclaimed to the guard:

“Dear! I can’t go under that dreadful Lincoln flag. Is there no other
way for me to enter?”

“Yes, madam,” promptly replied the soldier, and turning to his comrade,
he said:

“Here, orderly, bring out that rebel flag and lay it on the ground at
the little gate, and let this lady walk over it!”

The lady looked bewildered, and after hesitating a moment, concluded to
bow her head to the flag which had so long protected her, and passed
under it with submissive grace.




                    FORT CLINCH AND FERNANDINA, FLA.


On the 28th of February, 1862, Commodore S. F. Dupont, commanding the
South Atlantic Blockading Squadron, set sail from Port Royal, S. C., the
headquarters of General Sherman, for the purpose of taking military
possession of the forts and towns on the coasts of Georgia and Florida.
Brigadier-General Wright accompanied him, as commander of the land
forces. The squadron consisted of twenty vessels of war, seven
transports, and a few schooners and smaller vessels.

The first point of attack was to be Fernandina, Fla., an important
seaport near the entrance of St. Mary’s river, the boundary between
Georgia and Florida. The main channel is between Cumberland and Amelia
islands, with fourteen feet of water on the bar.

Fort Clinch, a regular bastioned work of brick, with heavy casemates,
and guns mounted _en barbette_, commanded the entrance. This place had
been strongly fortified by the rebels and mounted with guns of the
heaviest calibre. Commodore Dupont anticipated a stubborn resistance,
but the garrison, on learning the approach of the formidable expedition,
deemed their position indefensible, and evacuated the fort, leaving
twelve of their heaviest guns behind.

The town of Fernandina was also occupied by the Federal forces without
any resistance. Many of the inhabitants had fled, and those remaining
were terrified on the approach of the vessels, having been assured by
the rebels that the national forces would subject them to unrestrained
pillage and abuse. The kind and conciliatory government instituted by
General Wright soon restored confidence, and the people returned to
their homes and occupations.




                     THE MERRIMAC AND THE MONITOR.

                             MARCH 9, 1862.


The most remarkable naval battle which has ever taken place in the
history of the world was the encounter between the two iron-clad steam
batteries, Merrimac and Monitor, in Hampton Roads, Va.

The Merrimac was one of five war-steamers authorized to be constructed
by an act of Congress, passed at the session of 1844–5, and was built at
Charlestown, Mass. The spar deck was 281 feet long, and 52 broad, in her
original condition. The vessel was completed and launched in 1856. She
was soon put in commission, and continued in the service until April,
1861, when she was lying at Norfolk Navy Yard for repairs.

When the Government property at the Navy Yard and in the neighborhood of
Norfolk was destroyed or rendered unserviceable, to secure it from
seizure by the Confederates, the Merrimac was scuttled.

Not long after the rebels had taken possession of the Navy Yard the
Merrimac was raised, and placed in the floating-dock. Here she was
remodeled, and covered by a sloping roof of iron plates, four inches
thick, which bore her down so heavily, that it became almost impossible
to launch her. When launched she drew four feet of water over the
calculated draught, and was again placed upon the dry-dock, and
underwent material changes in her construction. Her bow and stern were
steel-clad, and the bow furnished with a projecting ram for the purpose
of piercing an antagonist. The armament consisted of four eleven-inch
navy guns, broadside, and two one hundred-pounder rifled guns, at the
bow and at the stern.

The Monitor was built by contract, under the act of Congress of July,
1861, appropriating $1,500,000 for iron-clad vessels. Captain Ericsson
presented proposals for a battery to be launched within one hundred
working days from the date of the contract. The contract was awarded to
him in October, and on the one hundred and first working day the Monitor
was launched from the Continental Iron Works at Greenpoint, New York.

The Monitor is low, wide, and flat-bottomed, with vertical sides, and
pointed ends, requiring but shallow water to float in. The sides of the
vessel are formed of plate iron, half an inch thick, outside of which is
attached solid white oak twenty-six inches thick: outside this again is
rolled iron armor five inches thick. The inclination of the lower hull
is such that a ball to strike it in any part must pass through at least
twenty-five feet of water, and then strike an inclined iron surface at
an angle of about ten degrees. In the event of an enemy boarding the
battery they can do no harm, as the only entrance is at the top of the
turret or citadel, which cannot easily be scaled, and even then only one
man at a time can descend into the hull.

[Illustration:

  BIRDS-EYE VIEW OF HAMPTON ROADS, VA., MARCH 8, 1862.

  1. Hampton Roads.—2. Fortress Monroe.—3. Rip Raps.—4. Newport News
    Point.—5. James River.—6. Sewall’s Point.—7. Pigs Point.—8. Craney
    Island.—9. Elizabeth River.—10. Norfolk.—11. Portsmouth.—12.
    Gosport.—13. Suffolk.—14. Nansemond River.—15. Merrimac.—16.
    Monitor.—17. Cumberland.—18. Congress.—19. Minnesota.—20.
    Yorktown.—21. Jamestown.—22. St. Lawrence.—23. Roanoke.
]

The principal novelty of this vessel is the cylindrical revolving
turret, rising from its exact centre, in which the guns are placed. This
is formed of rolled one-inch iron plates bolted together to the
thickness of eight inches; its internal diameter is twenty feet, and it
is nine feet high. It rests at its lower edge on a smooth, flat ring of
composition metal, but when in action the principal portion of its
weight is sustained by a central shaft, about which it revolves; a
massive wedge being driven below the steps of the shaft on such occasion
to raise it, and thus cause it to bear up the turret. A large spur wheel
upon the shaft is connected by a train of gearing with a small
steam-engine, which supplies the power for turning the turret.

Two eleven-inch guns are placed within the turret, in position precisely
parallel with each other, on smooth ways, or slides; a clamp being
arranged upon the sides of the ways for adjusting the friction and
taking up the recoil in such distance as may be desired.

The turret is pierced in different places with four holes for the
insertion of telescopes, and just outside of the holes reflectors are
fixed to bend the rays of light which come in a direction parallel with
the guns through the axis of the telescope, which is crossed by a
vertical thread of spider’s web through the line of collimation. The
sailing-master takes his position in the turret, with his eye to the
telescope, and his hand upon the wheel that governs the motion of the
small engine, and turns the turret so as to keep the guns always
directed with absolute precision to the object against which the fire is
directed. A scale is also arranged for adjusting the elevation of the
guns with similar engineering precision.

Upon the sides of the turret that have the port-holes through which the
guns are discharged, the massiveness is increased by an additional
plating three inches in thickness; making the sides of the turret
presented to the enemy eleven inches.

In preparing for action, the awning over the turret is removed, and the
square smoke stacks as well as the shorter pipes, through which air is
drawn into the vessel, are taken down. A small, square tower at the bow
is the wheelhouse, in which the steersman stands. It is made of bars or
beams of iron nine by twelve inches, interlocked at the corners.

After a preliminary trial trip, the Monitor sailed from the Brooklyn
Navy Yard for Fortress Monroe, on the 6th of March, and at five o’clock
on the afternoon of that day, discharged her pilot off Sandy Hook. Her
officers at this time were as follows:

Lieutenant-commanding John S. Worden; Lieutenant and Executive Officer,
S. D. Green; Acting Masters, I. N. Stoddard, J. W. Webber; Acting
Assistant-Paymaster, Wm. E. Keeler; Acting Assistant-Surgeon, D. C.
Logue; Government Inspector, Alban C. Stimers; First Assistant-Engineer,
Isaac Newton; Second Assistant-Engineer, Albert S. Campbell; Third
Assistant-Engineers, R. W. Sands, M. T. Sunstron; Acting Masters’-Mate,
George Frederickson.

The voyage to Fortress Monroe was safely terminated by the arrival of
the vessel with her consort about eight o’clock on the evening of the
eighth. Important events had transpired in Hampton Roads on that day.
The Merrimac had steamed down towards the sloop-of-war Cumberland,
blockading James river, and demanded a surrender. This was refused, when
the monster turned ponderously, and bringing her bow to bear on the
Cumberland, dashed into her side, rending the timbers as she went. She
then drew her iron prow from the shattered vessel, scattering a storm of
splintered wood on the water, and receding to a safe distance, poured a
broadside in from her guns. The crippled Cumberland, still vibrating in
all her timbers, returned the broadside. This was answered and returned
without intermission for fifteen minutes. During this time shot and
shell boomed over the water, crashed into the doomed vessel, and fell
like mighty hail on the iron coat of the Merrimac. But while every shot
told on the quivering woodwork of the Cumberland, the Merrimac threw off
the iron missiles as a rock beats back the tempest, sending in her
volleys more triumphantly each moment. The brave old man-of-war stood up
to the slaughter much as a blinded horse, forced among the wild bulls of
a Spanish arena falls, gored to the heart, but fighting desperately.
Half full of water, which still came pouring in through her wounded
side, recoiling like a living thing from each outburst of shot and
shell, she at last settled slowly to the waters’ edge, and sunk, pouring
out a defiant broadside as she went down, with the stars and stripes
floating at her mast-head.

The Merrimac then challenged the Congress, a Federal sailing frigate, of
1,867 tons, but was also refused a surrender. This refusal was replied
to by the guns of the rebel vessel, and after a short contest, when it
became hopeless to continue resistance, the Congress surrendered, and
was fired and abandoned. The evening was clear, the air still, the water
without a ripple, and the scene was magnificent, as the noble vessel
became wrapped in its fiery shroud. When entirely enveloped in flame,
the fire reached the magazine, and an explosion took place which
scattered the burning wreck in one vast upheaving of fragments and
cinders, kindling up the sky with its glare, and throwing portions of
the wreck the distance of a mile. The Merrimac having succeeded in
sinking the Cumberland and compelling the Congress to surrender,
withdrew for the night, evidently confident that in the morning she
would sweep away the rest of the fleet.

As the day closed, sadness and gloom filled the hearts of the Federal
officers in the fleet and Fortress. They felt assured that the powerful
enemy that had just made such murderous work had only retired for the
night to recruit, and then return to complete the destruction she had
commenced, having the sailing vessels at her mercy. While despondency
settled on many brows, and conjectures were rife as to where the
Merrimac would direct her attention the next day, a gleam of hope arose.
At eight o’clock in the evening a bright, movable light was discovered
seaward, coming from the direction of Cape Charles beacon. It being
known that the Ericsson Battery had left New York two days previous,
surmises were rife that this light might proceed from her deck. The best
night telescopes were brought into requisition, and in less than half an
hour after it first hove in sight, the fact was circulated that the
Ericsson Battery was coming up the Roads. The news spread like wildfire,
and the ramparts in the fort were soon lined with troops. At nine
o’clock the Monitor anchored off Fortress Monroe.

The next day, (Sunday, the 9th,) dawned fair and calm. The sun rose with
almost cloudless splendor, a soft haze alone hung upon the water, so
silvery and transparent that it hardly intercepted the view.

At half-past six o’clock, A. M., this haze cleared away. Looking towards
Sewall’s Point there appeared the Merrimac and the rebel steamers
Yorktown and Patrick Henry. They were stationary—the Merrimac to the
right of the others, blowing off steam. Their appearance was the cause
for a second alarm. The rebel craft seemed deliberating what to
do—whether to move on and attempt the destruction of the Minnesota,
which was aground, or to attack the Union fleet anchored near the Rip
Raps. The appearance of the Merrimac on this second visit caused great
precipitation in the removal of the Federal transport fleet to a safe
harbor a mile or two up the Chesapeake. At seven A. M., a plan seemed to
have been adopted, and the Merrimac steamed in the direction of the
Minnesota, which was still aground. The Yorktown and Jamestown were
crowded with troops, and steamed slowly after the Merrimac. The plan of
the latter seemed to be to destroy the Minnesota, and then proceed to
shell out the Union camp at Newport News, land and take possession of
the camp with their own troops.

The Merrimac steamed along with boldness until she was within three
miles of the Minnesota, when the Monitor emerged from behind the latter,
and proceeded towards the Merrimac. At first the rebel craft seemed
nonplussed, and hesitated, no doubt, in astonishment at the
strange-looking vessel approaching her. The Merrimac then closed the
distance between her and the Monitor until they were within a mile of
each other. Both batteries stopped. The Merrimac fired a shot at the
Minnesota, to which no reply was made. The rebel craft then fired at the
Monitor; the latter replied, hitting the Merrimac near the water line.
The Merrimac then commenced firing very rapidly, first from her stern
gun at the Monitor, and then her broadside guns, occasionally firing a
shot at the Minnesota. The fight went on in this way for an hour or two,
both vessels exchanging shots pretty freely. Sometimes the Merrimac
would retire, followed by the Monitor, and _vice versa_.

While the fight between the batteries was going on, one hundred solid
nine-inch shot were sent up from Fortress Monroe on the steamer Rancocas
to the Minnesota. At a quarter-past ten o’clock the Merrimac and Monitor
had come into pretty close quarters, the former giving the latter two
broadsides in succession. They were promptly replied to by the Monitor.
The firing was so rapid that both craft were obscured in columns of
white smoke. The ramparts of the fort, the rigging of the vessels in
port, the houses and the bend were all crowded with sailors, soldiers
and civilians. When the rapid firing alluded to took place, these
spectators were singularly silent, anxious and doubtful of the result.
Their impatience was soon removed by the full figure of the Monitor,
with the stars and stripes flying at her stern, steaming around the
Merrimac, moving with the ease of a duck on the water. The distance
between the vessels was forty feet. In this circuit the Monitor’s guns
were not idle, as she fired shot after shot at her formidable
antagonist.

At eleven A. M., the Minnesota opened fire, and assisted the Monitor in
engaging the Merrimac. She fired nine-inch solid shot with good
accuracy, but with apparently little effect. The Merrimac returned the
fire with shell, one of which struck and exploded the boiler of the
gunboat Dragon, which was alongside the Minnesota, endeavoring to get
her off. For the next hour the battle raged fiercely between the
Merrimac on the rebel side and the Union vessels, the Monitor, Minnesota
and Whitehall, but with no particular result. The Minnesota presenting
the best mark, the Merrimac fired at her frequently, alternately giving
the Monitor a powerful shot. The Merrimac made several attempts to run
at full speed past the Monitor to attack and run down the Minnesota. All
these attempts were parried, as it were, by the Monitor. In one of these
desperate efforts the Merrimac ran her plow or ram with terrible force
against the side of the Monitor; but it only had the effect of careening
the latter vessel in the slightest degree.

The rebel boats Yorktown and Patrick Henry kept at a safe distance from
the Monitor. The former vessel, at the beginning of the fight, had the
temerity to come within range of the Monitor. The latter fired one shot
at her which entered her pilot-house, carrying it away, when she retired
out of range.

The fire raged hotly on both sides, the opposing batteries moving around
each other with the skill, ease and dexterity of knights in a
tournament. The Merrimac, though the strongest, did not move with the
freedom of her antagonist; hence the Monitor had the advantage, taking
choice of position. At a quarter before twelve o’clock, the Merrimac was
in full retreat, heading for Sewall’s Point, and chased for a few
minutes by the Monitor. The Merrimac had evidently suffered to some
extent, and it was thought at one time that she was sinking. After she
got safely under the guns of the rebel battery at Sewall’s Point, she
stopped and signalled for help from her consorts, who were beating a
retreat. Subsequently two tug-boats or gunboats went alongside, took her
in tow, and proceeded to Norfolk. This ended the combat.

Toward the close of the engagement, Lieutenant Worden was standing in
the pilot-house, when a percussion shell struck the turret, and
exploded. The openings for sighting outside objects, through one of
which Lieutenant Worden was looking, allowed the fine dust and splinters
to enter, injuring his eyes. Almost immediately afterward the same thing
occurred, and this second injury rendered him completely blind, and he
was compelled to retire below. It was feared that he was permanently
injured in this gallant encounter, but after careful treatment his sight
was restored, and he was again ready for duty.

This remarkable encounter between two iron-clad vessels was regarded
with the greatest interest throughout Europe, where its importance to
the questions of naval architecture and warfare was fully appreciated
and understood. It had not only a direct bearing upon the construction
and working of floating batteries, but it demonstrated that a new engine
of war had been introduced that might render valueless for effective
defence all the land batteries against which these iron antagonists
might be brought to bear.

The destruction of the Cumberland and Congress on the first day of the
engagement, and the triumphant condition in which the Merrimac had
retired from the heavy broadsides of the Federal frigates, which would
almost have destroyed an ordinary vessel, created intense excitement in
all the seaport cities of the North. The loud boasts of the rebels over
the strength, sailing qualities, and impregnable character of their
vessel, apparently justified by the events of March 8th, led to an
apprehension that she might be successful in running out to sea, and
visiting Philadelphia, New York, Boston, and other cities, which were
entirely unprepared for a sudden attack.

The appearance of the Monitor alongside of the Minnesota, on the morning
of the 9th, was altogether unexpected, and the rebel commander evidently
knew that he had no common foe with which to deal.




                     CAPTURE OF JACKSONVILLE, FLA.

                            MARCH 12, 1862.


Jacksonville, the principal town in East Florida, is situated on the St.
John’s river, twenty miles from the sea. Vessels drawing twelve feet of
water can cross the bar. An important commercial city of Florida, it was
desirable to restore it to the protection of the government, and after
the capture of Fernandina, the commanders of the expedition turned their
attention to the accomplishment of this object. The United States
gunboat Ottawa, in company with the Pembina and Seneca, succeeded in
crossing the bar off Jacksonville, on the 11th of March. Commodore
Rogers found to his great satisfaction, as already at Fernandina and St.
Mary’s, no attempt to dispute his progress or resist the restoration of
the city to its allegiance to the government.

Contrary to expectation on both sides, the approaches to this place by
the river were not defended, and no resistance was offered to the Union
forces by land or water. As at Fernandina, the batteries were evacuated,
and the guns for the most part left behind. This was by order of General
Trapier, who is said to have acted upon orders from General Lee,
commanding the Confederate troops on the South Carolina, Georgia and
Florida coast. There were some five thousand rebel troops in this part
of Florida—at Fernandina, and on the line of the railroads to
Tallahassee and Cedar Keys.

When it was ascertained by the Mayor of the city that the troops were to
be withdrawn, he held a consultation with General Pyles, in company with
a portion of the city council, in which the question of resistance was
freely discussed. The retirement of the troops, and the entirely
defenceless condition in which the people had been left, allowed them no
choice had they been ever so much determined to dispute the entry of the
Federal forces. The Mayor, H. H. Hoeg, issued a proclamation, informing
the citizens that no opposition would be made, and calling upon all the
inhabitants to treat their expected visitors with proper decorum, and to
do nothing that would provoke any ill-feeling between citizens and
soldiers.

On the arrival of the vessels Lieutenant Stevens was politely received
by the authorities, who came on board his vessel, the Ottawa, and
through S. L. Burritt, Esq., gave up the town. Many of the inhabitants
had abandoned their homes, fearing to trust the Federal troops. Others,
however, remained, and testified their gratification at the arrival of
the fleet.

Unfortunately, however, they did not reach Jacksonville in time to save
that beautiful town from the flames, as a part of it was laid in ruins.
On the afternoon of the 11th, some five or six hundred armed men,
claiming to be a part of the force which had been stationed at
Fernandina, arrived by railroad, and announced that they had come, by
order of General Trapier, to burn the steam saw-mills, lumber, etc.,
which might be of value to the Federal authorities. No time was given to
save property of any description. At dusk the torch was applied, and in
a brief space eight of these immense establishments, forming nearly a
circle on both sides of the river, were in a blaze. Immediately
afterwards, the spacious and elegant hotel, well known to Northern
invalids as the Judson House, was fired by unknown persons, together
with warehouses, the railroad freight depot, etc., etc. All this
property was a total loss to the owners, as no attempt was made to save
or rescue any portion of it. The loss was estimated at half a million of
dollars.

The population of Jacksonville, before the war broke out, was about four
thousand. It had a large trade, as the St. John’s river is settled with
plantations, and is navigable for two hundred miles above the town for
large vessels, and there were a dozen steamers running on it. The lumber
trade was very extensive and prosperous. About fifty million feet of
Florida pitch pine were sawed there annually. This business was ruined
by the incendiaries. The exports of rosin, turpentine, etc., amounted to
$100,000 annually; cotton, $250,000; cedar, $100,000, etc. The arrivals
of vessels were about 400 yearly. The town was built mainly of brick,
lighted with gas, and was a great resort for invalids, for its mild and
balmy climate. The Florida, Atlantic and Gulf rail road, starting here,
intersects with the road from Fernandina to Cedar Keys, twelve miles
from Jacksonville, and then goes on to Tallahassee, the capital, one
hundred and sixty miles, and thence eighteen miles to St. Mark’s, on the
Gulf.

General Sherman and staff arrived on the 20th, in the steamer
Cosmopolitan. He immediately issued a proclamation to the people,
assuring them of protection and peace, and calling upon them to continue
their accustomed business. On the same day a meeting of the citizens was
held, at which the most loyal sentiments were avowed, and a series of
very strong resolutions adopted in favor of the Union, and denouncing
the acts of the secession convention and the State authorities in a most
emphatic manner. The resolutions also called for the holding of a
Convention of the State to organize a State government for Florida, and
called upon the chief of the military department of the United States to
retain at Jacksonville a sufficient force to maintain order and protect
the citizens and their property and persons.

The loyal men of the town, after being thus assured of the continued
protection of the government, gave evidence of their patriotism and
devotion to the constitution; and for a time they enjoyed the peace and
protection they so much desired. But it was of short duration, and the
result was more disastrous to them than the uninterrupted occupancy of
the place by the rebel force would have been. Not only had the most
important business establishments been sacrificed to the flames, but the
principal hotels and other buildings had also been destroyed by the
retiring enemy. In a short time General Hunter, the new commander in
that department, ordered the evacuation of the city by the Federal
troops, and they accordingly withdrew. Immediately the rebel forces
returned, the secession authorities renewed their administration, and
the active Unionists were arrested, imprisoned, their property
confiscated, and in many cases their lives were sacrificed. Some of them
were fortunate enough to escape with their families and some personal
effects, and obtain passage on vessels bound to New York, where they
arrived, and narrated a painful history of their sufferings.
Jacksonville occupied and speedily evacuated by Federal troops, makes a
gloomy chapter in the history of loyal adversities during the rebellion.




                      OCCUPATION OF COLUMBUS, KY.

                             MARCH 3, 1862.


The city of Columbus stands on the Kentucky shore of the Mississippi,
twenty-five miles below Cairo, which is at the junction of the Ohio and
Mississippi rivers. It is a place of great natural strength, from the
high and precipitous bluffs upon which the city is built. This important
position had been early seized as a stronghold by the enemy, and
herculean labors had been performed in the erection of batteries and
fortifications, and the mounting of immense guns of the heaviest
calibre. The necessity of holding Columbus against the Federal approach,
in order to protect Nashville, Memphis, Vicksburg and New Orleans, was
one of the great incentives to the rebel commanders in expending so much
labor and time in its defence. But all their calculations had been
shaken by the capture of Forts Henry and Donelson, and the evacuation of
Bowling Green. Their line of defence was broken by these brilliant
movements, their flank was exposed, and they were in danger of having
their retreat cut off by a vigorous movement of the Federal army flushed
by brilliant successes. There was no alternative but to risk a similar
defeat and capture, or to evacuate their works. The latter course was
adopted, and on February 27th, the army commenced its retreat from the
apprehended foe. They carried away with them large quantities of
commissary stores, ammunition, guns, and war material of every
description, and by March 2d, had abandoned their works and the city.

On the same night, Lieutenant-Colonel Hogg, of the Second Illinois
Cavalry, left Paducah to reconnoitre in the direction of Columbus. At
the same time, the flotilla at Cairo was being put in a state of
complete readiness for a movement, which was kept a profound secret from
all but the commander and his advisory officers. Commodore Foote,
himself, was not acquainted with the movement of Lieutenant-Colonel
Hogg.

On the morning of the 4th, at daylight, the flotilla left Cairo, and
dropped down the river. Commodore Foote and General Collum were on board
the flag-ship Cincinnati, accompanied by the gunboats St. Louis,
Louisville, Carondelet, Pittsburgh, Lexington, and four mortar boats.
General Sherman commanded the transports Aleck Scott, I. L. McGill and
Illinois, with the following troops aboard: Twenty-seventh Illinois,
Colonel Buford, Forty-second Illinois, and two batteries.

On reaching that part of the river which makes a curving sweep toward
Columbus, the vessels took up various positions, the mortar-boats being
placed at a favorable point on the Missouri shore, where they could
shell the rebel works, and be out of sight and range of their guns.
While the gunboats were gradually nearing the fortifications, a flag was
discovered flying from the summit of the bluffs. It was at too great a
distance to be distinctly discerned, but the possibility of the Federal
flag flying on that spot was not to be entertained. General Sherman, on
a tug-boat, advanced and turned the bend in the river, out of sight of
the fleet. No shot was fired, and the gunboats followed in time to
discover the General and some of his men scaling the summit of the
bluff. The stars and stripes were floating magnificently where only a
few hours before the flag of the enemy asserted dominion. The General
soon ascertained that Lieutenant-Colonel Hogg had arrived on the
afternoon of the 3d, and quietly occupied the abandoned fortifications,
and raised the national colors on their walls.

The works were extensive, of massive strength, capable of resisting a
protracted siege, and supplied with guns, of which 128-pounders formed a
part. The natural position, as well as the immense defensive
preparations which had been made, seemed to render them impregnable to
an attacking force. Yet with all these advantages the enemy had spiked
many of their guns, rolled them down the bluff into the river, destroyed
large amounts of stores, burnt their buildings and retired.

The Federal forces, jubilant with their easy conquest, and spared the
horrors of bloodshed, took possession of the place in a spirit of
cheerful triumph. There was no drawback to the rejoicing—no dead to
bury, no wounded to send their groans through the cheering shouts that
rang far and wide from under the stars and stripes when they were once
more flung to the wind. Columbus was drawn back to the Union almost
without an effort.




                       BATTLE OF PEA RIDGE, ARK.

                            MARCH 6–8, 1862.


One of the most brilliant events of the war west of the Mississippi, was
the battle of Pea Ridge, which lasted from the 6th to the 8th of March,
and crowned the national army with a splendid victory, after a long and
toilsome pursuit of the rebels.

After the removal of General Fremont from the command in Missouri, the
army which he had led from Jefferson City to Springfield, made a
retrograde movement, falling back on Rolla, St. Louis and the towns on
the line of the Missouri river. As was to be anticipated, the
consequence of this retreat was the return of General Price, with his
forces, and the reoccupation of the whole of Southern Missouri by the
insurgents. They remained in possession of the field until February,
when a new national force, under Generals Curtis, Sigel and Ashboth
entered the field and advanced rapidly in pursuit of the retreating
enemy. The rebels fell back, to avoid a general engagement, and
evacuated Springfield, on the 12th of February, near which, in a brief
skirmish, General Curtis’ army encountered and defeated them. On the
morning of the 13th General Curtis entered the town, and restored the
national flag to its place. Price left about six hundred sick men behind
him, and large quantities of forage and wagons. He expected that the
Federal army would remain several days at least in Springfield, to give
the troops rest, satisfied with the reoccupation of this valuable
position.

But General Curtis was not a man to sleep upon his arms. On the morning
of the 14th, he resumed his pursuit, and continued his march to Crane’s
Creek, about twenty-two miles from Springfield. He pressed closely upon
the enemy, and on the 17th had another encounter with them at Sugar
Creek. This protracted pursuit of three weeks, at an average rate of
twenty miles a day, is remarkable in the history of warfare. But like
most western men, General Curtis had learned the art of war, and the
expediency of energetic action to some purpose. He had given up his seat
in Congress when the war broke out, and took the field, forgetting
politics and every thing else in a burning love of his country. With
such men long marches and hard fighting is the business of war. They
shrink from nothing but inaction.

Both armies had now reached the soil of Arkansas. The rebels being
rapidly reinforced by regiments which had been stationed in that State
and the Indian Territory, General Price was in a better position to give
battle. Upon mature deliberation, General Curtis selected Sugar Creek as
the best position he could take to withstand any attack which might be
made upon him. The enemy had, in the mean time, taken up his position in
the locality of Cross Hollow, which was peculiarly adapted to his mode
of warfare. But this was not long permitted, for on learning that the
Union troops were turning their flank by way of Osage Spring, Price’s
followers again decamped in hot haste, leaving behind a considerable
quantity of supplies and munitions of war. By this time the lines of the
Union army extended nearly ten miles. The right was under General Sigel,
resting at the Osage Springs, and the left under Colonel Carr, extending
to Cape Benjamin. Colonel Carr’s headquarters were at Cross Hollows.

Having abandoned Cross Hollows, General Price took up a fresh position
in the Boston Mountains, a high range that divides the waters of the
White Mountains and Arkansas, where every effort was made to rally the
dispirited rebels and augment the ranks of his command. Here it was that
he was reinforced by Generals McCullough, Pike and Van Dorn. These
combined armies were estimated at thirty-five thousand men.

Matters remained comparatively quiet until the 5th of March, when
General Curtis received information that the rebels were advancing to
give battle. The information proved correct, and the 6th, 7th and 8th
will long be held in remembrance as the anniversary of one of the
bloodiest conflicts of the war.

Pea Ridge is in the extreme north-west part of Arkansas, situated in
Benton, the corner county of the State. A range of hills—a spur of the
Ozark Mountains—sweeps from Missouri into this corner of the State, and
from thence branches into the Indian Territory, where the section known
as the Boston Mountains is found. Sugar Creek, where the battle
commenced, is situated close to Bentonville, the capital of the county
on the north. Pea Ridge is also adjacent to the same town, and forms a
part of the mountain range just described.

At this time it became evident to the several commanders that a general
contest was inevitable. A decisive combat was, in fact, desired by both
of the opposing forces. General McIntosh, confident of success with his
large army, under the leadership of Price, McCulloch, Pike and Van Dorn,
believed that he could strike a fatal blow at the Union cause west of
the Mississippi, by the annihilation of the Federal army. General
Curtis, on the other hand, was not less anxious for a contest, even at
the fearful disadvantage offered him. With his keen discrimination, he
saw the glorious results of a defeat of the four rebel chieftains united
against him. Should he prove successful in the almost desperate
encounter, it would prove the destruction of the rebel forces in the two
States, and leave a clear field for future operation. Should he fail—but
no true general even thinks of that after he has made up his mind to
fight.

At this time his force was divided into three divisions, as follows:

GENERAL SIGEL’S DIVISION.—_First Brigade, Colonel Gruesel._—36th
Illinois, Col. Gruesel; 25th Illinois, Col. Coler; 44th Illinois, Col.
Knoblesdorf. _Second Brigade, Col. Osterhaus._—12th Missouri, Col.
Osterhaus; 17th Missouri, Col. Hassendeufel; 2d Missouri, Col.
Schaeffer. _Third Brigade, Col. Asboth._—3d Missouri, Col. Friala;
Illinois Cavalry, (one battalion,) Capt’s. Jenks and Smith; 3d Iowa
Cavalry.

GENERAL DAVIS’S DIVISION.—_First Brigade, Col. Benton._—8th Indiana,
Col. Benton; 18th Indiana, Col. Patterson; 22d Indiana, Col. Hendricks.
_Second Brigade, Col. Julius White._—59th Illinois, Col. Fredericks;
37th Illinois, Col. Burnes; Missouri Cavalry, (battalion,) Maj. Broen;
2d Ohio, battery, Col. Catin; 1st Missouri Light Artillery, one battery.

GENERAL CARR’S DIVISION.—_First Brigade, Col. Dodge._—4th Iowa,
Lieut.-Col. Galighan; 35th Illinois, Col. G. A. Smith; 24th Missouri,
(battalion,) Maj. Weston. _Second Brigade, Col. Vandenier._—9th Iowa,
Lieut.-Col. Herron; 25th Missouri, Col. Phelps; 9th Iowa, battery, Capt.
Hayden; 1st Iowa, battery, Lieut. David. _Third Brigade, Col.
Ellis._—1st Missouri Cavalry, Col. Ellis; 3d Illinois, ——; 6th Missouri,
battalion, Maj. Wright.

Opposed to the forces of General Curtis, just enumerated, the rebel army
had fully ten thousand Missouri State troops under Major-General Price;
six to eight regiments of Arkansas troops under General McCulloch; six
regiments of Texans under General Earl Van Dorn; three thousand
Cherokee, Choctaw and Seminole Indians under Colonel Albert Pike, all
under command of Major-General McIntosh. Besides those mentioned, there
were two or three regiments of Louisiana troops and companies of
Mississippi and Alabama regiments under the command of their respective
colonels, majors and captains.

Upon this occasion the Union troops were well armed and equipped, while
the weapons of the rebels varied in character and effectiveness. Many of
them were excellent, embracing Minie rifles, Enfield muskets, and good
United States muskets. The larger portion, however, were hunting rifles
and shot-guns. The rebels had eighty-two field pieces, twenty of which
were rifled, while General Curtis’ forces had but forty-nine; nearly
all, however, were of superior manufacture and destructive power.

On the evening of the 5th of March, the scouts of General Sigel brought
in word, that large forces of the rebel cavalry were on the Pineville
road at Osage Spring. Sigel was evidently in a bad position, and on the
following day he commenced moving back, his pickets being driven in
before he could get his wagon train in motion. His route lay a few miles
to the north, when he struck the bed of Sugar creek, along which he
travelled six miles. It was there the battle first began. General Sigel
with two battalions of Missouri infantry and a squadron of cavalry
formed the rear guard of his division, and were delayed by the train
which moved slowly along the rough roads. He determined not to desert a
single wagon to the rebels, although by so doing, he could have easily
reached the main body of the Union forces.

The enemy made his appearance with 4,000 cavalry, at about 10 o’clock in
the morning, a few miles out of Bentonville, and immediately commenced
the attack by a desperate charge. Sigel had with him nearly 1,000 men.
He sent forward two hundred infantry to prevent the enemy cutting him
off, and with the remainder he received the whole of the vast army. He
ordered his men to stand firm and take good aim. The teams were put upon
good pace, and the enemy came rushing on in several lines. The horsemen
on the flanks and infantry in the rear awaited their approach until
within about 200 yards, when they delivered a terrible volley of Minie
balls into the rebel ranks, which had the effect of throwing them into
temporary confusion. In a few minutes the leaders succeeded in getting
them into something like order. This time they came up to close
quarters. The same volley, succeeded by a second and a third, greeted
them. The enemy came on in crowds, and their cavalry closed all around
the little band, notwithstanding horses and riders were falling thick
and fast before its steady fire. General Sigel rode undismayed along the
whole line, inspiring his men. Some of the cavalry on the flank had
succeeded in getting across the road so cutting the train in two. Here
the enemy set up a shout of triumph.

It was short lived. In a minute more the bayonets of the Union men had
done their work, leaving hundreds of dead and wounded in their tracks.
The enemy was driven off, broken and dismayed. Galled and maddened at
the repulse, his scattered ranks could be seen reforming to renew the
attack.

The column was yet seven miles from the encampment. A dispatch had been
sent forward to General Curtis, explaining the position and asking for
assistance. It was hardly possible that the messenger could have been
captured. The enemy was advancing on the road and along the ridges
enclosing the stream. At about two o’clock a second attack was made and
desperately carried forward. The rebel cavalry spurred their horses
right on to the irresistible bayonets, delivering their load of buckshot
from their miscellaneous guns, and then brandishing huge knives, which
every one of them carried in place of sabres.

They surrounded the rear guard a second time, and for a few minutes
friend could hardly be distinguished from foe. The dense smoke enveloped
the whole of the combatants, and for some time it was doubtful whether
any of the Union band survived. The faithful Germans never faltered for
a moment. Their gallant leader struck down a dozen who clamored for his
life, and hewed his way through a line of enemies to rejoin his command.
The bayonets proved the invincibility of the Union infantry against
horsemen. The foe retired a second time, and for an hour could not be
induced to return. By this time the advance, which had been constantly
skirmishing with the rebel cavalry, announced reinforcements in sight,
and a faint cheer went up, which was re-echoed by the troops from the
camp. A third and last attempt was made to capture the train. It failed,
and the enemy withdrew about 3½ o’clock.

General Sigel reached camp at 4½ o’clock, to receive the congratulations
of the whole army. His loss in the entire march was estimated at 60
killed and 200 wounded, many of whom fell into the hands of the rebels,
it being impossible to bring them off.

The night of the 6th of March was passed in a state of suspense. The
houses in the valley had been appropriated as hospitals, and a strong
force posted on the hill on the south bank of the creek under Colonel
Carr, with General Sigel occupying the ridge on the north side, while
Colonel Davis occupied the centre, near the crossing. The enemy, it was
supposed, would naturally make the attack from the Fayetteville road,
and the baggage trains and hospitals had been placed to the rear of the
lines. During the night the manifestations showed conclusively that he
was approaching in great strength by the road leading from Bentonville
to Keatsville, thus getting to the flank and rear. This road lies, after
crossing Sugar creek, over a high table land, called Pea Ridge. It
extends from the stage road westwardly some eight miles along the right
bank of Sugar creek.

The ridge is covered with a growth of stunted oaks, and a sprinkling of
larger growth, called post-oaks. Three or four farms were located upon
the ridge two miles west of the road, to which the name of Leetown has
been given. It was near these farms that the principal part of the
fighting took place.

Thursday night, March 6th, was clear and cold; the reflection of the
enemy’s camp-fires could be seen stretching along for miles to the
right. On the Fayetteville road the Union pickets reported nothing
unusual. Several Union field pieces had been placed in position,
sweeping that road. The men slept on their arms, that is each man lay on
the ground in fine of battle with his musket by him, ready for action at
a moment’s notice. A strong picket guard was extended for a quarter of a
mile beyond the lines, and the Federal soldiers awaited the break of day
with premonitions that the morrow’s sun would be the last which would
rise for many of them.

[Illustration:

  ATTACK OF COLONEL OSTERHAUS’ MISSOURI CAVALRY ON THE TEXAS RANGERS.
]

The evidences were very clear on the morning, that a strong force had
been posted on the Fayetteville road, thus standing directly between the
Union forces and their next line at Cassville, completely cutting off
communication with the outer world. The line of battle was changed.
Colonel Carr was sent back along the Fayetteville road, two miles, with
his right resting on Cross Timber Hollows at the head of Beaver Creek, a
tributary of Big Sugar Creek, immediately facing the rebel batteries on
the side of Elkhorn tavern. General Davis, with the central division,
was posted on the top of Pea Ridge, leaving Sigel to cover the camp with
his left wing resting on Sugar Creek. In this position things stood when
the rebels opened the fight with artillery on the extreme right, from a
very advantageous position at the distance of a mile. The Federal
batteries soon replied. The fight raged in front of Colonel Carr’s
division from 10 to 11 o’clock, when another battery was ordered up to
his support, for he was hotly pressed. The left, as yet, had not been
menaced. General Sigel felt confident that the enemy might be expected
to make a descent from the south side, and it was deemed indispensable
to keep the men ready for action in that direction. Colonel Osterhaus
was sent with his brigade in the morning along the high land in the
direction of Leestown, where he intercepted the reinforcements of the
enemy. This was one of the most spirited and successful attacks of the
battle, and resulted in a complete diversion of the enemy from the
overpowered forces of Colonel Carr, on the Fayetteville road.

The Union cavalry penetrated along the main ridge beyond the road by
which the enemy had advanced, and were on the point of seizing some of
his wagons when a brigade of rebel cavalry and infantry attacked them.
Then followed one of the most sanguinary contests that ever has been
recorded between cavalry. Most of the fighting was done at close
quarters. Pistols and carbines having been exhausted, sabres were
brought into requisition. The rattle of steel against steel, sabres
against muskets and cutlasses, was terrific. The rebels were Texas
Rangers, and fought like demons. The slaughter was awful. The Missouri
cavalry cleaving right and left, left winrows of dead and wounded in
front of their horses. The enemy fell back in dismay, the valorous
Federals pursued them along the road for a mile, when they opened a
battery upon the mass of friends and foes, plowing through them with
solid shot and shell. Colonel Osterhaus had succeeded in his attempt,
and retired, bringing off his dead and wounded in safety.

Meantime the contest was raging furiously on the extreme right on both
sides of the Fayetteville road. The First and Second Iowa batteries,
planted at an eminence overlooking the declivity in the road, were
plying shrapnel and canister into the ranks of the enemy, who appeared
in immense numbers on all sides, as if to surround the right of the
Union line, and thus completely environ them. In order to defeat this
object, a severe struggle took place for the occupancy of a rising knoll
on the east side of the road. The enemy gained upon the Federals, and it
was not until the men were half stricken down that they yielded the
point. Word had been passed back to General Curtis that the enemy was
pressing severely on the right flank, and the Union forces were sent
back. The section of a battery had been left on the hill, and the enemy
was now turning it upon the Union lines. Colonel Carr, fearing that no
reinforcements would arrive, collected his strength, and mustered his
entire force for a last desperate charge, resolved to retake the
position or perish in the attempt. A heavy firing on the centre, and a
cheer from the advancing division of General Davis favored the effort.
The troops marched up to the battery amid a storm of shot from their own
guns, and, after a desperate hand-to-hand struggle, finally drove the
enemy down the ravine, in hopeless confusion. Colonel Carr received a
wound in the arm, but remained on the field.

During the night a sharp fire of artillery had been kept up upon the
left, and from two Missouri batteries on the centre, under Colonels
Patterson and Fiala. The enemy had made frequent attempts to gain a
position nearer the Union lines, and succeeded in getting so near that
the balls from their guns would strike near the tents and baggage
wagons. Towards night the enemy made an attempt to break the Federal
centre, but the timely support of a brigade of General Sigel and a
section of artillery promptly repulsed them. The night closed with
skirmishing and sharpshooting.

Occasionally the report of a musket could be heard during the night,
then a second, and an interval of silence. But few of the soldiers
slept. The communication with Springfield was cut off, and Union
messengers were falling into the enemy’s hands. As yet the Federals had
gained little advantage, and with desperate fighting had only succeeded
in repelling equally desperate attacks. Nothing but hard fighting could
avail them. Filled with these thoughts, the soldiers solemnly gave their
wives and children into each others’ charge, no one being aware who the
survivor would be. Young men talked in low voices of the loved ones at
home, fathers, mothers, sisters, sweethearts—and messages full of tender
pathos were left to be given after death. It was indeed, an anxious,
mournful night.

The fight on the morning of the 8th, commenced by a salute from the
Union batteries on the extreme right. General Asboth, with a regiment of
infantry and a battalion of cavalry, had been sent to the support of
Colonel Carr, while General Sigel was moving up to a fresh position on
the ridge near Leestown. The enemy was unprepared for this sudden and
vigorous assault, and fled after a short and spiritless resistance. They
ran, leaving four pieces of artillery behind them, and a fifth was
afterwards taken in the pursuit. The enemy was being turned by the left
flank, General Sigel pushing boldly after him. An hour or more was spent
in contesting the possession of a spot on Cox’s farm, when the rebels
fell back to the hollow.

A pause ensued, when the right, under General Davis, moved along, and
after a sharp contest of half an hour, in which the rebel General
McIntosh, was killed, the enemy began to retreat to Cross Timber Hollow.
The whole line was then ordered forward. The rebels attempted to make a
stand on the next hill, but the Union artillery played upon them with
disastrous effect. The enemy on the road near the tavern refused to be
moved. General Asboth, with a large column of cavalry, was sent round to
outflank them, when another desperate conflict ensued between the Union
cavalry and the Texas and Louisiana troops. The Indians also took part
in it, but beyond shrieks and yells their influence was not felt. The
batteries of the enemy fired chains, spikes, pieces of bar-iron, and
solid shot. It was evident that his canister and shell were exhausted.
Now the Federal batteries on the right were ordered to the front. Taking
a position within five hundred yards, they poured in an incessant shower
of grape, canister and shell for twenty minutes. A general bayonet
charge was then ordered, and the Union line rushed down the valley and
ascended the opposite hill. A cheer went up from them as they delivered
volley after volley into the enemy’s ranks. The rebels cheered also; and
it was evident that they doubled the Union forces, from the overwhelming
shout that rang up from their lines.

At this time General Sigel was carrying everything before him on the
extreme left. The foe was running, and the Union men catching the
inspiration of the moment rushed on in pursuit. Before one o’clock the
rout was complete.

To the westward of Pea Ridge there was a wide strip of timber which had
been blown down by a hurricane the previous summer. Across this swarth
of uprooted trees, which were larger and denser in the low lands, the
enemy’s cavalry and artillery attempted to retreat, and were mercilessly
pelted with shell. The panic was overwhelming, and their defeat decided.
Muskets, clothing, and shot-guns were strewn along the woods. Horses
roamed about in wild droves. The cries of the cavalry men and the yells
of the Indians, with the groans of the wounded, surpassed all
description. Caissons overturned, wagons broken down, and horses dying
and dead strewed the whole road. Thirteen cannon, 6 and 12-pounders,
were taken in all, besides thousands of shot-guns and loads of
provisions.

It was in this position of affairs that General Price with a detachment
of his army had, in his attempt to make a stand on the Keatsville road,
caught the contagion of his fleeing comrades, and betook himself to the
northward, Colonel Carr and General Asboth keeping closely after him.

This was probably one of the most hotly contested battles of the war,
when every thing is taken into consideration, and it is worthy of remark
that few officers were wounded, although at all times exposed even to
recklessness. For three days the fighting continued, the men only
resting during the darkness, to renew the attack with the first light,
and even then were but partially allowed to slumber. Pea Ridge will
never be forgotten while we have a history.

The Federal loss in killed, wounded and missing, was 1,351. That of the
rebels about 2,000. Generals McIntosh and McCulloch were killed.




                        BATTLE OF NEWBERN, N. C.

                            MARCH 14, 1862.


Newbern, in Craven county, N. C., is situated at the confluence of the
Trent and Neuse rivers, which flow into Pamlico Sound, from whence,
through Ocrakoke Inlet, communication is had with the Atlantic. It is
eighty miles N. E. of Wilmington, and one hundred from Raleigh; has a
population of six thousand, and considerable commerce.

[Illustration:

  BATTLE OF NEWBERN, N. C., MARCH 14, 1862.
]

The importance of Newbern was early appreciated by the rebels, who
adopted vigorous means for its defence. The approaches to the city on
the south bank of the Neuse, the only available route of an assailant,
were defended by formidable earthworks, and, as a protection against
gunboats, a line of vessels, backed by a _chevaux-de-frise_, was placed
in the channel, commanded by heavy batteries.

The expedition designed to operate against Newbern sailed from Hatteras
Inlet on the 12th of March, the land forces under General Burnside, and
the naval forces under Commander Rowan. The land forces consisted of the
brigades of Generals Foster, Reno and Parke, much reduced, however, by
regiments left behind at Roanoke Island and Hatteras Inlet, and not
exceeding eight thousand men. They were supported by McCook’s battery of
boat howitzers, three companies of marines, and a detachment of the
Union Coast Guard. The distance from Hatteras Inlet to the entrance of
Pamlico Sound is twenty-three miles; thence, through the sound and up
the river to Newbern, about fifty miles.

Early on the morning of the 12th the entire force started for Newbern,
and that night anchored off the mouth of Slocum’s Creek, some eighteen
miles from Newbern, where General Burnside decided to make a landing.
The landing commenced by seven o’clock the next morning, under cover of
the naval fleet, and was effected with the greatest enthusiasm by the
troops. Many, too impatient for the boats, leaped into the water, and
waded waist deep to the shore; then, after a toilsome march through the
mud, the head of the column moved within a mile and a half of the
enemy’s stronghold, at eight P. M., a distance of twelve miles from the
point of landing, where they bivouacked for the night, the rear of the
column coming up with the boat howitzers about three o’clock next
morning. This detention was caused by the shocking condition of the
roads, consequent upon the heavy rain that had fallen during the day and
the whole of the night. It required a whole regiment to drag the eight
pieces which had been landed from the navy and the vessels of General
Burnside.

By signals agreed upon, the naval vessels, with the armed vessels
carrying the land forces, were informed of each others’ progress, and
were thereby enabled to assist the march by shelling the road in
advance.

At daylight on the morning of the 14th, an advance of the entire
division was ordered. General Foster’s brigade marched up the main
country road to attack the enemy’s left; General Reno up the railroad,
to attack their right, and General Parke was to follow General Foster
and attack the enemy in front, with instructions to support either or
both brigades.

On the morning of the 14th, at seven o’clock, the column of General
Reno, on the railroad, was the first to move, the Twenty-first
Massachusetts, as the right flank regiment, leading the advance. The
regiment had not proceeded far before it saw a train of cars standing on
the track. In front of the locomotive, on a platform car, a large rifled
gun was placed in position to rake the road. The men advanced at the
double-quick and poured in a volley with such accuracy of aim that the
enemy, who had already rolled the gun and caisson off the car, did not
stop to unload the carriage, but ran into the intrenchments, and the
train was backed towards Newbern, leaving the platform car standing on
the track. The Twenty-first had got within short range of the enemy’s
earthworks, but now fell back, and, forming line of battle in the woods,
opened fire. The Fifty-first New York was moved to the left and ordered
forward to engage a series of redans, the Ninth New Jersey occupying the
left of the line, and the Fifty-first Pennsylvania held in reserve, in
rear of the Ninth, a little to the left.

Meanwhile General Foster’s brigade had advanced up the main road to the
clearing, when the Twenty-fourth Massachusetts was sent into the woods
to the right of the road, and opening a heavy fire on the enemy
commenced the action of the first brigade. The Twenty-seventh was sent
to their left to support them, and, news being received that the enemy
were trying to outflank the Federals on the right, the Twenty-fifth was
sent to resist the movement. The Twenty-third being moved to the front
next in line of battle, opened fire upon the enemy, which was replied to
by very heavy volleys, and a cannonade from a park of field pieces
behind the breastwork. The very first cannon-shot killed
Lieutenant-Colonel Henry Merritt of the Twenty-third. General Foster’s
line of battle was completed by moving the Tenth Connecticut to the
extreme left, a position which they were compelled to maintain under the
most discouraging disadvantages. The ground was very wet, swampy, and
cut up into gulleys and ravines, which opened toward the enemy, offering
no protection from his fire.

General Parke’s brigade, which had followed the first brigade up the
main road, was placed in line between the Tenth Connecticut and
Twenty-first Massachusetts, the Fourth Rhode Island holding the right of
line, the Eighth Connecticut the next place, the Fifth Rhode Island,
next, and the Eleventh Connecticut on the left. The line of battle was
now complete, the Twenty-fourth Massachusetts on the extreme right, and
the Fifty-first Pennsylvania at the extreme left, and extended more than
a mile. The naval battery was in position at the centre, with Captain
Bennett’s and Captain Dayton’s rifles alongside, and were all worked
with the greatest gallantry throughout the day.

The fire of the enemy was now telling so severely upon the Twenty-first
that Colonel Clark ordered the regiment forward on a double-quick, and
at the head of four companies entered the breastworks from the railroad
track in company with General Reno, and the colors were taken into a
frame house which stood near, and waved from the roof. The men at the
nearest guns seeing the movement, abandoned their pieces and fled, and
the four companies being formed again in line of battle, charged down
the line upon the battery. Colonel Clark mounted the first gun, waved
the colors, and had nearly reached the second when two full regiments of
the enemy emerged from a grove of young pines and advanced upon his men,
who, seeing that they were likely to be captured or cut to pieces,
leaped over the parapet and retired to their position in the woods.

On being driven from the battery, Colonel Clark informed Colonel Rodman
of the Fourth Rhode Island of the state of affairs inside, and that
officer decided upon a charge with the bayonet. His regiment had been
firing, like the rest of the line, by companies and otherwise. When the
command was given to charge, they advanced at the double-quick directly
up to the battery, firing as they ran, and entered at the right flank,
between a brick-yard and the end of the parapet. With a steady line of
cold, sharp steel, the Rhode Islanders bore down upon the enemy, and,
routing them, captured the whole battery, with its two flags, and
planted the stars and stripes upon the parapet. The Eighth Connecticut,
Fifth Rhode Island and Eleventh Connecticut, coming up to their support,
the rebels fled with precipitation, and left the Union troops in
undisputed possession.

General Reno’s brigade were still attacking the redans and small battery
on the right of the railroad, and the firing was very heavy. The
Twenty-first was engaging the battery of five small pieces, the
Fifty-first New York the first of the redans, and the Ninth New Jersey
the next two. The Fifty-first Pennsylvania was still in reserve, drawn
up in a hollow or ravine, from which they would move up to the top of
the eminence, discharge their volleys, and retire to such cover as the
inequalities of ground might furnish. General Reno, becoming impatient
at the loss of life which his regiments, particularly that of Colonel
Ferrero, was suffering, urged that regiment to advance as soon as
possible; so Lieutenant-Colonel Potter took a color over the brow of the
hill into another hollow, and from thence charged up an acclivity and
over brushwood and abattis into the redan. The Fifty-first Pennsylvania
was ordered up to participate in the decisive charge of the whole
brigade upon the line of redans, and passing through the Fifty-first New
York, as it was lying on the ground after having exhausted all its
ammunition, came under the heaviest fire, and without flinching or
wavering moved to its place, and rushed, with the other regiments, upon
the defences of the enemy. The movement of Colonel Hartranft’s regiment
was executed splendidly, and proved a complete success.

The movement of the Third brigade was supported by a charge of the
Fourth Rhode Island from the captured main battery upon the works which
were being assailed, and the enemy, already demoralized by the breaking
of their centre, fell back before the grand charge upon the left and
front of their position, and fled in confusion. On the extreme right the
brave Twenty-fourth and its supporting regiments had been advancing inch
by inch, standing up against the enemy’s musketry and cannonade without
faltering, and almost at the time when the Fourth Rhode Island charged
in at the right flank, the colors of the Twenty-fourth were planted on
the parapet at the left, and the whole of the First brigade poured into
the fortification. The whole line of earthworks was now in Union hands,
and the cheers of the Federal men, from one end of it to the other,
broke out with fresh spirit as each new regimental color was unfurled on
the parapet.

The approaches to Newbern were defended by a line of water batteries or
forts communicating with extensive field fortifications. The lower fort
is about six miles from the city; the next communicates with the
unfinished batteries and breastworks; the others were distributed about
equal distances along the shore. The line of fortifications attacked and
stormed was some three miles in extent. At the river bank a hexagonal
fort, or water battery, with a large bomb-proof and thirteen heavy guns,
commanded in addition, the river approach. By means of pivot carriages
the cannon could be turned upon an advancing land force, and even sweep
the line of breastworks itself in case the garrison should be driven
out. From the fort to the centre of the line a well-made breastwork
extended, with a deep moat in front. At the centre was a bastion and
sallyport, after which the breastwork was continued to the railroad
embankment, which was used as a means of defence. Beyond the railroad,
but completely protecting the right flank of the main battery, was a
small battery, of irregular shape, communicating with a system of
thirteen redans, or rifle-pits, each pair of which were constructed on a
knoll rising between ravines, the conformation of the ground furnishing
in itself a most admirable basis for field-works. The locality was
chosen with rare judgment, and all that engineering skill could
accomplish was done to make these fortifications an impassable barrier
to hostile troops. From the railroad westward, a swift, deep brook, with
muddy bottom, and a wide border of swamp on both sides, ran in front of
the redans; and on the side of approach, the timber was so very heavy,
that, when felled, it presented a barricade which would seem enough of
itself to stop any army of French Zouaves. On the brow of each mound,
brushwood had been piled with regularity to the height of four feet in
front of the redans, rendering it extremely difficult to take them by
assault from the front. The redans were constructed of heavy timbers,
covered with at least five feet thickness of earth, while an interior
ditch say three feet in depth gave complete protection to the garrison
from volleys of musketry, or discharges of grape and canister shot.

Inside, the battery presented a most revolting appearance. Beneath the
parapet, in the ditch, on the open ground under the gun-carriages, lay
the dead and mangled bodies of rebels. On every side lay heaped the
bleeding carcasses of artillery horses, killed by musket or rifle balls.
Here and there a broken gun-carriage, or caisson, lay tilted into the
mud. Stores of all kinds were scattered over the ground or trampled in
the black mire. Muskets with broken stocks or bent barrels were thrown
about in every direction. It was a scene of wild confusion on all sides.

It was not known with certainty that there was no other battery erected
formidable as this still further up the road; but thinking it best to
increase the panic which had seized upon the enemy, General Burnside
ordered an advance. General Foster immediately sent forward the
Twenty-fourth, Twenty-fifth, Twenty-seventh, and the whole brigade by
the straight road. In the charge on the rifle-pit about one hundred
rebels, among them the Colonel of the Thirty-third North Carolina and a
number of commissioned officers, were captured. When these were secured
in an old brick-kiln and placed under guard, Generals Reno and Parke
moved their brigades after General Foster’s, the former going before up
the railroad track and the latter by the country road. The march to
Newbern was unobstructed, the enemy having apparently all he could do to
get away on any terms, and early in the afternoon the Union forces
reached the bank of the river immediately opposite the city. Long before
they came in sight of it, however, dense volumes of smoke were seen
rising in that direction, and the suspicion that the place had been
fired by the enemy was fully realized when its steeples and houses came
in view. Newbern had been fired in seven different places, and if the
wind had not mercifully subsided there would hardly have been a house
left standing by nightfall. The splendid railroad bridge, seven hundred
yards long, had been set on fire by a scow load of turpentine which had
drifted against it, and the great structure was wrapped in one grand
sheet of flame. Preparations were made by General Foster to move his
forces across the river. This was accomplished by the assistance of a
light draft stern-wheel steamer which had been captured with four or
five small side-wheel boats by the naval gunboats, which by this time
were quite up to the city wharves.

To the eastward of the city a very large rebel camp, with barracks and
tents, was found deserted and taken possession of. Stragglers from
different regiments wandered through the city and committed some acts of
depredation; but were speedily checked by a strong Provost-Guard
appointed by the commanding General.

The forts taken were Fort Dixie, 4 guns; 1 100-pound rifle and 3
32-pounders. Fort Thompson, 12 guns; 2 100-pound rifle and 10
32-pounders. Fort Ellis, 8 guns; 1 8-inch columbiad, 1 100-pounder,
under casemate, and 6 32-pounders. Fort Lane, 4 guns; 2 100-pounders and
2 32-pounders. Two forts, at the foot of the city, mounting 2 guns each.
Three guns on a car and two lying on the wharf.

The Federal loss was about 100 killed and 450 wounded. That of the
rebels, who were protected by their fortifications, about 220 in killed
and wounded. About 300 prisoners were taken by Lieutenant Hammond of the
gunboat Hetzel, who was serving one of the guns of McCook’s battery.


                           NAVAL OPERATIONS.

The naval operations under Commander Rowan, were conducted with great
skill and success. The navigation was impeded in every possible way by
the rebels. Sunken vessels closed the main channels at all accessible
points, while torpedoes, chevaux-de-frise and fire-rafts threatened
destruction on every side. Captain Rowan hoisted his pennant on Thursday
morning on board the steamer Delaware. At half-past eight A. M., the
gunboats commenced shelling the woods in the vicinity of the proposed
place of landing, taking stations at intervals along the shore to
protect the advance of the troops. At half-past nine A. M., the troops
commenced landing, and at the same time six naval boat howitzers with
their crews, under the command of Lieutenant R. S. McCook, of the Stars
and Stripes, were put on shore to assist the attacks. The army commenced
to move up the beach at half-past eleven A. M., the debarkation of
troops still continuing. In the mean time the vessels were slowly moving
up, throwing shell in the woods beyond. At a quarter-past four, P. M.,
the first of the enemy’s batteries opened fire on the foremost of the
gunboats, which was promptly returned at long range. The troops were now
all disembarked, and steadily advancing without resistance. At sundown
the firing was discontinued, and the fleet came to anchor in position to
cover the troops on shore. At half-past six, A. M., Friday, 14th
instant, there was heard a continuous firing of heavy guns and musketry
inland, and immediately the fleet commenced throwing shells in advance
of the position supposed to be held by the Union troops. The fleet
steadily moved up, and gradually closed in towards the batteries. The
lower fortifications were discovered to have been abandoned by the
enemy.

A boat was dispatched to it and the stars and stripes planted on the
ramparts. As they advanced, the upper batteries opened fire. The fire
was returned with effect, the magazine of one exploding. Having
proceeded in an extended line as far as the obstructions in the river
would permit, the signal was made to follow the movements of the
flag-ship, and the whole fleet advanced in order, concentrating their
fire on Fort Thompson, mounting thirteen guns, on which rested the
enemy’s land defences. The army, having driven them out of these
defences, the forts were abandoned. Several of the vessels were slightly
injured in passing the barricades of piles and torpedoes which had been
placed in the river. The upper battery having been evacuated on the
appearance of the combined forces, it was abandoned and subsequently
blew up. They now steamed rapidly up to the city. Upon the approach of
the Federals, several points of the city were fired by the enemy, where
stores had been accumulated. Two small batteries, constructed of cotton
bales, and mounting two guns each, were also fired by them. Two small
steamers were captured, another having been burned. A large raft,
composed of barrels of pitch and bales of cotton, which had been
prepared to send down upon the fleet, was fired, and floating against
the railroad bridge, set it on fire and destroyed it. In addition to the
prizes, a quantity of pitch, tar, and a gunboat, and another vessel on
the stocks, several vessels afloat, and an immense quantity of arms and
munitions of war, fell into their hands.

Washington, Morehead City and Beaufort were in turn occupied by General
Burnside’s forces without resistance, and the inhabitants generally
evinced a friendly spirit. The commandant of Fort Macon having refused
to surrender, preparations were immediately made to invest and capture
that place.




                     THE CAPTURE OF NEW MADRID, MO.

                            MARCH 14, 1862.


Shortly before the evacuation of Columbus, General Pope, with a large
force, was dispatched by the commander of the Department to besiege the
town of New Madrid, on the Mississippi river, in the extreme
south-eastern section of Missouri. This place had been strongly
fortified by the rebels, and garrisoned by five regiments of infantry
and several companies of artillery. The town is about seven miles below
Island No. 10, but owing to a bend in the river, lies nearly west. Its
possession was deemed important, in order to advance the Union forces
down the Mississippi.

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS, AND THE ISLANDS BY THEIR
    NUMBERS.
]

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES FROM NEW ORLEANS, AND THE ISLANDS BY THEIR
    NUMBERS.
]

The enemy had one bastioned earthwork, mounting fourteen heavy guns,
about half a mile below the town, and another irregular work at the
upper end of the town, mounting seven pieces of heavy artillery,
together with lines of intrenchments between them. Six gunboats carrying
from four to eight heavy guns each, were anchored along the shore,
between the upper and lower redoubts.

The country is perfectly level for miles around the place, and the river
was so high just then, that the gunboats looked directly over the banks;
and the approaches to the town for seven miles were commanded by direct
and cross-fire from at least sixty guns of heavy calibre.

The column under General Pope left Commerce, Mo., on the 27th of
February, and, after six days of hard marches through and over the
interminable jungles of the great Mingo or Nigger Wool swamp, sat down
before the town. They had scarcely been in camp a day before the river
batteries opened upon them, forcing the right wing back a few hundred
yards further from the river.

Trials and dangers now beset the Federal army, which would have
discouraged less brave men. It would not have been difficult to carry
the intrenchments, but it must have been attended with heavy loss, and
they could not have been held half an hour exposed to the destructive
fire of the gunboats. It therefore became necessary to bring down a few
heavy guns by land to operate against those of the enemy. They were
accordingly sent for; and meantime, forced reconnoissances were pushed
over the whole ground, and into several parts of the town. Some brisk
skirmishes resulted, in which the enemy invariably retreated
precipitately. It was found impossible to induce them to trust any
considerable force of their infantry outside of their intrenchments.
While awaiting the arrival of the heavy guns, Colonel Plummer, of the
Eleventh Missouri, was dispatched to Point Pleasant, eight miles below,
with three regiments of infantry, three companies of cavalry, and a
field battery of 10-pound Parrott and rifled guns, with orders to make a
lodgment on the river bank; to line the bank with rifle-pits for a
thousand men, and to establish his artillery in sunk batteries of single
pieces between the rifle-pits. This arrangement was made in order to
present the smallest possible marks to the shells of the gunboats, and
to render futile the use of round shot from their heavy guns. Colonel
Plummer, after some cannonading from the gunboats which he found there,
succeeded in making a lodgment, constructing his batteries and
rifle-pits, and occupying them in sufficient force to maintain them
against any open assault.

After repeated and persistent cannonading from the gunboats, the enemy
found it impossible to dislodge him. He maintained his position, and
effectually blockaded the river to transports, during the whole siege.
Meantime, the enemy continued every day to reinforce New Madrid, until,
on the 12th, they had nine thousand infantry, besides a considerable
force of artillery and nine gunboats. The fleet was commanded by
Commodore Hollins, the land forces by Generals McCown, Stewart and
Gantt. On the 11th, the Federal siege guns were delivered to Colonel
Bissell for his engineer regiment, who had been sent to Cairo. They were
at once shipped to Sykestown, reached New Madrid at sunset on the 12th,
and were placed in battery during the same night, within eight hundred
yards of the enemy’s main work, commanding the river above it. They
opened fire at daylight on the 13th, just thirty-four hours after they
were received at Cairo.

A brigade, consisting of the Tenth and Sixteenth Illinois, under Colonel
Morgan, of the Tenth, was detailed to cover the construction of the
battery, and to work in the trenches. It was supported by Stanley’s
division, consisting of the Twenty-seventh and Thirty-ninth Ohio, under
Colonel Groesbeck, and the Forty-third and Sixty-third Ohio, under
Colonel Smith. Captain Mower, First United States infantry, with
companies A and H of his regiment, was placed in charge of the siege
guns.

The enemy’s pickets and grand guards were driven in by Colonel Morgan,
from the ground selected for the battery. The work was prosecuted in
silence, and with the utmost rapidity, until at three o’clock, A. M.,
two small redoubts connected by a curtain, and mounting four heavy guns
were completed, together with rifle-pits in front and on the flanks for
two regiments of infantry. The batteries opened as soon as the day
dawned, and were replied to in front and on the flanks by the whole of
the enemy’s heavy artillery on land and water.

The Union guns were served by Captain Mower with vigor and skill. In a
few hours they disabled several of the gunboats, and dismounted three of
the heavy guns in the enemy’s main work. Shortly after the Union
batteries opened, one of the 24-pound guns was struck in the muzzle by a
round shot from the enemy’s batteries and disabled.

The cannonading was continued furiously all day by the gunboats and land
batteries of the enemy, but without producing any impression. Meantime
the Union trenches were being extended and advanced toward the bank of
the river. General Paine now made a demonstration against the rebel
intrenchments on the left, supported by Palmer’s division. The enemy’s
pickets and grand guards were driven in, and the skirmishers forced
their way close to the main ditch.

A furious thunder storm began about eleven o’clock that night, and
continued almost without interruption until morning. Just before
daylight, General Stanley was relieved in his trenches with his division
by General Hamilton. A few minutes after daylight, a flag of truce
approached the batteries, bearing information that the enemy had
evacuated his works. Small parties were at once advanced by General
Hamilton to ascertain the truth of this report; and Captain Mower, First
United States infantry, with companies A and H of that regiment, were
sent forward to plant the United States flag over the abandoned works.

The enemy had made a hasty and precipitate flight. Their dead were found
unburied, their suppers stood untouched on the tables—candles were
burning in the tents. Private baggage of officers and knapsacks of the
men were left behind. Neither provisions nor ammunition were carried
off—everything gave evidence of a panic. Artillery, field batteries and
siege guns, amounting to thirty-three pieces; magazines full of fixed
ammunition of the best character; several thousand stands of inferior
small arms, with hundreds of boxes of musket cartridges; tents for an
army of ten thousand men; horses, mules, wagons, intrenching tools,
etc., were among the spoils.

Their flight was so sudden that they abandoned their pickets, and gave
no intimation to the forces at Island No. 10.

The Union loss was fifty-one killed and wounded. The enemy’s loss could
not be ascertained. A number of his dead were left unburied, and over a
hundred new graves were found.




                             ISLAND No. 10.


When the necessity of an early evacuation of Columbus became apparent to
the rebel leaders, they commenced the fortification of Island No. 10, in
the Mississippi river, forty-five miles below Columbus and twenty-six
from Hickman. It is located 250 miles below St. Louis and 997 from New
Orleans; and when chosen by the secessionists it was deemed impregnable.
The earthworks were constructed with great skill, and well calculated to
resist any assault which could be made from the river above, while they
held undisputed control of the navigation below, and had at their
command a formidable fleet of gunboats. New Madrid, on the Missouri
shore of the river, a few miles below, was fortified and garrisoned by
rebel troops, and they had easy communication and abundant facilities
for supplies and reinforcements, if needed.

The energy and perseverance of General Pope, which enabled him, despite
the most serious obstacles, to invest and capture the town of New
Madrid, was the first note of warning received by the rebels at Island
No. 10 that their position was no longer tenable.

The topography of the peninsula on the Tennessee shore, immediately back
of the island, where most of the rebel forces were located, is very
peculiar; and if the disadvantages of position which the course of
events gradually unfolded could have been foreseen, the site would never
have been selected. Commencing at a point about a mile and a half above
the island is a range of high land, which extends back south-eastwardly
to Reelfoot Lake, a distance of four miles. This lake, in the rear of
the peninsula, is fifteen miles in length, and terminates in a swamp,
which extends south of Tiptonville, a town on the river bank, below the
peninsula. The swamp at that time varied in width from one and a half to
eight miles, its narrowest point being four miles above Tiptonville,
where the rebels had prepared a corduroy road and bridge, as a means of
escape from their position, should retreat by land become necessary.

On the 15th of March, the gun and mortar-boats comprising the fleet of
Commodore Foote commenced the investment and bombardment of Island No.
10, and the rebel batteries and camps at the adjacent peninsula on the
Tennessee shore.

The fleet consisted of eleven gunboats, and twelve mortar-boats, each of
the latter carrying one immense mortar, throwing a shell of two hundred
and twenty pounds weight a distance of from two to three miles. The
Commodore engaged the rebel batteries almost daily for three weeks,
deeming it imprudent to risk the destruction of his vessels by close
action, as any misfortune to them would have placed all the towns on the
Upper Mississippi at the mercy of the armed steamers of the enemy.

The rebels had eighty guns of heavy calibre in the batteries on the
island and the adjacent peninsula, while the iron-clad ram Manassas, and
a fleet of twenty vessels—gunboats, steamers and transports, were moored
under their guns, prepared to act as opportunity or emergency might
require.

One or more gunboats would advance to attack a shore battery from the
right hand of the river—or engage the water battery on the island,
approaching from the left bank. The mortars kept continually changing
positions, generally hugging the shore on the left bank where the rebel
batteries could not reach them, as they were covered by a promontory, or
neck of land, made by the bend of the river; and their fire was kept up
so unceasingly, that frequently a mortar-shell was thrown every hour
during the night.

At two o’clock on the morning of April 1, a most daring enterprise on
the part of Colonel Roberts, of the Forty-second Illinois regiment, was
crowned with success. Taking advantage of a severe storm while the
elements were raging furiously, and a dreadful hurricane, accompanied
with thunder and lightning, was sweeping the earth and driving the
vessels from their moorings, he started with forty picked men, in six
yawl boats, and with muffled oars rowed towards the upper water battery
on Island No. 10, keeping close to the edge of the river bank. The
boats, favored by the intense darkness, approached within a few rods of
the battery, when a blinding sheet of lightning flashed across the
water, revealing the adventurous party to the enemy’s sentinels. The
dark object looming out from the storm alarmed the sentinels, who fired
wildly and at random, fleeing with the first discharge. The Union boats
made no reply. A few minutes more brought them to the slope of the
earthworks, and the men at once sprung over the parapet. In less than
five minutes the huge guns on the battery were securely spiked. They
were all of large calibre, consisting of two 64, two 80-pounders and one
splendid 9-inch pivot gun. Their desperate work accomplished, the boats
returned safely to the fleet, having performed a perilous exploit with
wonderful success.




              CAPTURE OF ISLAND No. 10 AND THE REBEL ARMY.


After the surrender of the forts at New Madrid, Colonel Bissell’s
engineer regiment was engaged for four days unspiking guns, changing
batteries, and establishing new works. Then they were sent over by
General Pope to ascertain whether it would be practicable to establish
batteries opposite Island No. 10, and enfilade the rebel works on the
Tennessee shore. They spent three days in the swamps, living in their
canoes with negroes, but found the project impracticable. Colonel
Bissell, however, stated that he could by hard labor get steamboats and
flatboats through the woods and bayous, and by that means avoid the
batteries on the island, and bring the vessels to New Madrid, whence
General Pope’s army could be transported to a point nearly opposite, and
take all the enemy’s works in the rear.

General Pope at once gave him a _carte blanche_, and he sent to Cairo
for four steamboats, six flats, and such guns as could be spared. They
sent the steamers W. B. Terry, John Trio, Gilmore, and Emma, with the
barges, a quantity of lumber, etc., and one eight-inch columbiad and
three thirty-two pounders. Tools were not needed, for the regiment
carried everything, from the heaviest ropes and screws down to fine
steel drills for unspiking guns.

The route was about twelve miles long, of which two traversed were
through thick timber, and the remaining ten narrow, crooked bayous,
choked up with brush and small trees. They cut their way through, the
track being fifty feet wide, of which thirty feet was required for the
hulls of the boats. The timber was cut four feet below the surface of
the water. In one short stretch they cut seventy-five trees, not one
less than two feet through. The machines were rigged from rafts and
flats, and each worked by about twenty men. In the first place three
large launches went ahead to cut out and clear away the underbrush and
driftwood; then three rafts followed, on which were the axemen, followed
by the saws, two large barges, and one of the steamboats. Very large
lines were provided to run from the capstan of the steamboat and haul
out by snatchblocks what the men could not handle. Men were engaged all
the time in the fleet which followed, converting the flatboats into
floating batteries.

[Illustration:

  BOMBARDMENT OF ISLAND NO. 10.

  1. Rebel Floating Battery.—2. Rebel Gunboats and Rams.—3. Federal
    Gunboats.—4. Point Pleasant.—5. Island No. 10.—6. Smith’s
    Landing.—7. Mortar Boats.
]

From the starting point on the river to the levee the distance is about
five hundred feet; here the water was shallow and the route full of
stumps. It took one whole day to pass this point. Then they cut in the
levee. Here the fall was over two feet, and the rush of water
tremendous. The largest boat was dropped through with five lines out
ahead. Then a corn field, overflowed from a cut in the levee, where a
channel was cut by the swift water, and floated them onward nearly a
quarter of a mile to the woods. Here was great labor—two straight and
long miles to the nearest point in the bayou. It took eight days to get
through this distance. Then came Wilson’s Bayou, East Bayou, and St.
John’s Bayou, which empties into the Mississippi at New Madrid. It
sometimes took twenty men a whole day to get out a half sunken tree
across the bayou; and as none of the rafts or flats could get by, this
always detained the whole fleet. The water, after they got in the woods,
was about six feet deep, with a gentle current setting across the
peninsula. In the East Bayou the current was tremendous, and the boats
had to be checked down with heavy head lines. Here they found some
obstructions, caused by heaps of driftwood, but a few sturdy blows
dislodged some of the logs and sent the whole mass floating down the
current.

While the engineers were engaged in this herculean enterprise, the
gunboat Carondelet ran safely by the rebel batteries on the island, and
reached New Madrid on the night of April 4th. On the succeeding night
another boat, the Pittsburg, ran the gauntlet of the enemy’s fire
unscathed, in time to convoy the transports as they entered the river.

On the 6th of April the two gunboats attacked and destroyed four
batteries erected by the rebels on the Tennessee shore. On the 7th, by
daylight, the divisions of Generals Paine and Stanley were marched to
Tiptonville, fifteen miles down the river from New Madrid. The rebels
had retreated in that direction the afternoon before, and it was thought
that they were endeavoring to cross over Reelfoot lake. The troops were
pushed forward with all possible speed, and at night encamped at
Tiptonville and Merriwether’s, while a strong force was posted at the
only point where by any possibility the rebels could cross the lake,
some four miles from the town. Squads of rebel soldiers kept in sight of
the Union pickets during the night, and at times would come boldly up
and surrender themselves as prisoners of war. At daylight General Pope
and staff, and Assistant Secretary of War Scott, went down to the
locality, and General Pope assumed the full command. It was expected
that some resistance would be made, and no one surmised that the enemy,
who it was learned had marched over from Island No. 10, had concluded to
give himself up. But shortly after sunrise General Pope received a
message from the General commanding the Confederates, stating that he
had surrendered the island and fortifications to Commodore Foote the
night before, and that the forces under his command were ready to follow
the “fortunes of war;” and he requested General Pope to receive and
march them into camp. General Pope gave directions for the Confederate
troops to come into camp and go through the formula. Accordingly about
four thousand rebels were marched in and stacked their arms.

On the same day Island No. 10 was surrendered to Commodore Foote, with
all its war material; and all the gunboats and transports fell into the
hands of the victors.




                       BATTLE OF WINCHESTER, VA.

                          MARCH 22, 23, 1862.


On the 21st of March, General Shields, commanding a division of the
Fifth Army Corps of the Potomac, under General Banks, was stationed at
Winchester, with a force of about seven thousand men. General Jackson,
with a rebel force of ten thousand men, and twenty-eight pieces of
artillery, was then at Strasburg, ten miles distant, closely
scrutinizing the movements of the Federal army, and only awaiting the
arrival of General Johnston, his superior, who was daily expected with a
much larger force. With these united, they expected to strike a telling
blow on the army of General Banks, and thus prevent any combined action
on his part with General McClellan.

Not anticipating an immediate attack from General Jackson, General Banks
had just left Winchester for Harper’s Ferry, and General Williams’
division had marched the same day towards Centreville. Of these
movements the rebel General was duly notified, as his numerous spies
within the Federal lines lost no opportunity of supplying the enemy with
full details of all the actions of the Federal commanders.

Though looking for reinforcements from Generals Longstreet and Smith,
Jackson determined to attack Shields’ troops;—but his attempt to
surprise them was frustrated by the vigilance of that officer.
Apprehensive that the enemy designed an early advance, General Shields
had just completed a hasty reconnoissance to Strasburg, by which he
obtained important information of Jackson’s numbers and intentions. This
induced him to withdraw most of his men to a position two miles
north-east of Winchester, while his pickets extended five miles beyond,
on the Strasburg road. The enemy were led to believe that the town was
open to their occupation, and that the greater portion of the Federal
troops had been withdrawn from the vicinity.

On Saturday afternoon, March 22, about a quarter-past two o’clock, the
Federal advanced pickets on the Strasburg road discovered the rebel
cavalry, under Colonel Ashby, about half a mile beyond them,
reconnoitering the woods on both sides of the turnpike, and steadily
advancing. The pickets consisted of a few men of the Fourteenth Indiana
infantry at that point, and they fell back half a mile to the hamlet of
Kernstown, four miles from Winchester. Steadily did the troopers advance
as the Union men wheeled to aim and fire. The first volley sent many
rebels reeling from their saddles, and threw the rest into confusion.
Before they could be again rallied for a charge, the gallant little band
of infantry was beyond their power, without having lost a man killed or
wounded. General Shields hearing of the advance of the rebel cavalry,
ordered four advanced companies of infantry to rally to the support of
the pickets, and hold the rebels in check till he could move down the
division. These companies were one from the Maryland First, one from the
Twenty-eighth Pennsylvania, one from the Forty-sixth Pennsylvania, and
one from the Twenty-eighth New York. Their regiments had marched away
under General Williams.

A battery of artillery was also sent forward, and General Shields, after
ordering out the division, rode to the front, accompanied by his staff.
While engaged in directing the fire of the artillery, a shell from the
rebel battery of four guns, which now began to play on them, burst near
him, and a splinter from it struck him in the left arm, just above the
elbow, fracturing the bone and creating a painful wound. But without
heeding it he gave a fresh order to the artillery, and continued on the
field till satisfied that all was right.

The Federal division began to arrive in force on the field towards dark;
the rebels, perceiving this, did not push their advance, but halted
about three miles from Winchester for the night, lighted their camp
fires and bivouacked, while the opposing army lay between them and the
town.

About ten o’clock on Sunday, reinforcements of five regiments of
infantry and two batteries of artillery having arrived from Strasburg,
under General Garnett, were welcomed by vociferous and prolonged cheers
from their lines. The attack was not long delayed. The enemy advanced
his army, which now consisted of sixteen regiments of infantry,
numbering eleven thousand men; five batteries of artillery, with a total
of twenty-eight field pieces, and three battalions of horse, under Ashby
and Stewart. His line of battle extended about a mile on the right of
the village of Kernstown, and a mile and three-quarters on the left of
it. The village lay on the road between the rebel right and centre.
There is a mud road branching from the turnpike a mile or so from
Winchester to the right of the road going towards Strasburg. This road
passed through the left of the enemy’s centre, and was one of their
points of defence. Beyond that is a grove of trees, and farther on, a
ridge of hills with a stone wall about breast-high running along its
summit. This was the rebel line of offence and defence on the right of
the Union line.

The most advanced regiment on the Union side was the Eighth Ohio, of
General Tyler’s brigade. The rebels made a furious onslaught about
half-past ten o’clock, A. M., on Thursday, with the intention of turning
the right flank. The Ohio Eighth met them with a deadly fire of rifles.
Five times did the enemy emerge from the woods and from behind their
stone parapet with vastly superior numbers, and strive in vain to
accomplish their object. The Union left wing, consisting of the
Thirteenth Indiana, Seventh Ohio and a battery of the Fourth regular
artillery, under Captain Jenks, had a feint made on it, while the real
attack of the enemy was being directed against the Union right wing. The
feint on the left was a heavy fire of artillery posted on both sides of
the village and the turnpike, which, however, did trifling damage. The
Union battery replied, silencing those of the enemy, though the firing
was well maintained for a long time on both sides. The Union centre
consisted of the Fourteenth Indiana, the Eighth and Sixty-seventh Ohio,
and the Eighty-fourth Pennsylvania. Two artillery batteries belonging to
the First Ohio artillery, and the cavalry, consisting of the First
Michigan and First Ohio, were drawn up in the rear. The Union right wing
was made up of the Fifth and Eighth Ohio regiments and a battery of the
First Virginia regiment. The reserves consisted of the Twelfth Indiana,
the Thirty-ninth Illinois and a squadron of the Michigan cavalry.
General Shields was unable to appear on the field in person, and the
command consequently devolved upon Acting Brigadier Kimble, who led the
centre. The right was commanded by Acting Brigadier General Tyler, while
Colonel Sullivan directed the operations on the left.

The battle raged along the whole line with great fury from eleven A. M.
till half-past two P. M., when General Shields, who received accounts of
the progress of the fight on his couch, ordered the right, where the
contest raged the hottest, to charge upon the enemy. That was an awful
charge. The left of the enemy prepared desperately to repel the gallant
troops, but their rush was irresistible. Previous to this the Union line
of battle had been somewhat changed. The Eighty-fourth Pennsylvania
reinforced its right, and also a battery of artillery. The whole Union
force now engaged was about six thousand men, while that of the enemy
was at the lowest estimate eight thousand. The rebels had also changed
their line, and extending both their wings, presented a concave front.
They had reinforced their left wing, and the charge to be made by the
Union right was all important in its consequences. On it, at three
o’clock, depended the fate of the entire battle. Tyler led the charge,
sword in hand. The rebels fired from the woods with artillery and small
arms, while the Federals advanced against their murderous showers of
lead and iron, returning few shots and reserving their fire.

[Illustration:

  SPLENDID CHARGE OF THE RIGHT WING, UNDER GENERAL TYLER.
]

Up to this time the armies had not been much nearer to each other than
three hundred yards, unless in some few instances. The wood was soon
cleared at the point of the bayonet, the Unionists discharging their
pieces at twenty and even five yards distance from the rebels, and then
dashing at them with the bayonet.

The rebels fought well. They contested the ground foot by foot, and
marked every yard of their retreat with blood. They retired behind the
stone wall, on the ridge, but the Unionists jumped over, and drove them
in the greatest confusion and with fearful slaughter upon their centre.
The panic was contagious. Kimble ordered a charge along the whole line,
and for a short time the fighting was desperate. The roar of the cannon
was no longer heard, unless in occasional bursts, but the rattle of
musketry was more deafening than ever.

The rout of the rebels had fairly commenced; two of their guns and four
caissons were taken, and though many of them turned and fired again and
again at the pursuing host, many more threw away muskets and bayonets
without hesitation. Darkness and the extreme fatigue of the Union
troops, however, saved them for the time, and the Federals retired about
two miles and bivouacked.

At daybreak General Shields ordered the rebel position to be attacked,
and the enemy, after replying by a few shots from his artillery,
continued his retreat. Meantime General Banks, who had been at Harper’s
Ferry, arrived, and taking command of the troops in person, continued
the pursuit with about ten thousand men, and pressed the rebels beyond
Middleburg, cutting off many stragglers. The object was to capture his
whole force, if possible. General Williams, with his forces, arrived on
the field, too late to participate in the action. They joined in the
chase.

The loss of the enemy in killed and wounded was six hundred. The number
of prisoners taken was three hundred.

The Union loss in killed was one hundred, and about four hundred
wounded. Though the enemy had a much larger force, four pieces of cannon
more than the Federals, the selection of fighting ground, and every
other advantage, yet all the trophies of the occasion belong to the
Union army.

The rebels had an Irish battalion of one hundred and fifty men, of whom
forty were killed on the field, and many of the rest wounded. Their
commander, Captain Jones, was captured, having lost both eyes by a
bullet.

The loss on the Union side was heaviest in the Eighty-fourth
Pennsylvania regiment. Of the five companies of three hundred men, in
all, engaged, they lost Colonel Murray, a brave officer; one captain,
one lieutenant, twenty-three privates and non-commissioned officers
killed, and sixty-three wounded. The loss in the Eighth and Fifth Ohio
regiments was about seventy-five and sixty, respectively, killed and
wounded.

Lieutenant-Colonel Thorburn, of the Third Virginia, was among the
wounded. These were the only field officers killed or wounded in the
Union forces.

The battle-field after the struggle was a terrible sight. The night was
dark and cold. After the battle the ambulances were busily engaged
removing the wounded. The enemy carried off most of their wounded and
some of their dead. The wounded were intermingled with the dead, and
their sufferings before they were removed to the hospitals were
heart-rending. The next day was spent in burying the dead. The ghastly
aspect of the field after the wounded were removed, and before the dead
were interred, was appalling.




                      BATTLE OF PITTSBURG LANDING.

                            APRIL 6–7, 1862.


When the surrender of Forts Henry and Donelson reached Washington and
Richmond there was depression among the secessionists and great
rejoicing at the North. The news of these events was followed directly
by the capture of Nashville and New Madrid, and it became certain to the
Confederate leaders that Island No. 10 must soon surrender. Under these
untoward events it became imperative that a new strategic point should
be at once established beyond reach of the gunboats, that had already
produced so much mischief. Beauregard, then in command, selected Corinth
as the most promising point for his operations, and a position which
would render any attempt of the Federals to cut him off from western
Tennessee, or the eastern and southern States, extremely difficult of
success. He called on the Governors of Tennessee, Mississippi and
Alabama for help, and a prompt response was made. First came Polk from
Columbus, then Bragg from Mobile and Pensacola, followed by General A.
S. Johnston from Murfreesborough, who took command. After selecting
their new line of defence, they commenced fortifying it and diligently
concentrated their forces. Generals Hardee, Breckinridge, Sterling Price
and Hindman soon came in, and the fortifications made rapid progress.

Corinth is a very important strategical point. It is situated in a
branch of the Apalachian range, which diverges from the Alleghany
mountains, and forms the uplands and gold-bearing regions of Georgia and
Alabama. The village is nearly surrounded by an irregular circle of
hills, rising in the north, about four miles distant, with the State
line between Tennessee and Mississippi crossing their summit. The Mobile
and Ohio railway intersects this ridge through a cut seventy-five feet
in depth. Similar cuts, of lesser depth, penetrate the hills on the
east, west and south, where the railways enter. Beyond these hills, in
the direction of Pittsburg and Savannah, the ground becomes more level,
and is generally low and swampy. The topography of the region renders
Corinth susceptible of strong defences. The village was formerly called
Farmington, and is so mentioned in the gazetteers. It is a post village
of Tishomingo county, Mississippi, distant two hundred and sixty-two
miles north-east from Jackson, the capital of the State. There were not
half a dozen stores in the village, and its population was relatively
small. Tishomingo county forms the north-eastern extremity of
Mississippi, bordering on Tennessee and Alabama. The Tombigbee river
rises in the county; the Tennessee flows along the north-east border,
and it is drained by Tuscumbia creek. A large portion of the county is
covered with forests of oak, hickory, walnut and pine.

The principal military value of this place consists in the fact that the
railroads from Memphis on the west, Columbus, on the north, and Mobile
on the south, cross at this point.

About the middle of March Grant’s victorious army at Nashville was sent
by Halleck to occupy first Savannah, and then Pittsburg Landing,
preparatory to the arrival of Buell’s Kentucky army, when Halleck
intended himself to take the field and move on Corinth.

Pittsburg Landing is situated in Hardin county, Tenn., on the west side
of the Tennessee river. It is in itself of little importance, being
close to Savannah, which is a flourishing post village of Hardin county,
situated on the eastern side of the river. The Landing is about one
hundred and twenty miles from Nashville; nearly one hundred miles from
Columbia, on the Nashville and Decatur railroad; by a turnpike road,
crossing the river at a ferry, about twenty-five miles from Corinth. The
country is very wild, the surface rising on both sides of the river in a
gradual ascent.

Savannah is the capital of Hardin county. Previous to the rebellion it
had been a place of considerable business note. The population in 1853
was only eight hundred, but it had been greatly increased. The area of
the county is about six hundred and fifty miles. The Tennessee river
flows through it, dividing it into nearly equal parts. The river is
navigable for steamboats through the entire county, which has a
population of over ten thousand persons, nine-tenths of whom are free.

General Grant proceeded at once to Savannah, where his headquarters were
established. The divisions of his army were sent gradually to Pittsburg,
and had not all arrived when the assault was made. No defences had been
erected, and the possibility of an attack from the Confederates had not
been for a moment entertained. On the 5th of April Buell left Nashville
and arrived at Savannah the same day. The division of his army under
Nelson was on the battle field on the sixth, at five P. M.

The Confederates had for some time intended to attack Grant before Buell
could join him, and on hearing of his near approach they hastened the
action, without waiting for their own reinforcements. This bold movement
was made just one day too late.


                    POSITION OF THE FEDERAL TROOPS.

Pittsburg Landing is simply a narrow ravine, down which a road passes to
the river bank, between high bluffs on either side. There is no town
whatever. Two log huts comprise all the signs of habitation visible.
Back from the river is a rolling country, cut up with numerous ravines,
partially under cultivation, but the greater portion is thickly wooded
with large patches of underbrush. From the Landing a road leads directly
to Corinth, twenty miles distant. A mile or two out, this road forks;
one branch is known as the lower Corinth road; the other, the Corinth
ridge road. A short distance out, another road curves off to the left,
crosses Lick Creek, and leads back to the river at Hamburg, some miles
up the stream. On the right, two separate roads lead off to Purdy, and
another, a new one, runs across Snake Creek to Crump’s Landing on the
river below. Besides these, the whole country that composed the
battle-field was cut up with roads leading to different camps.

On and between these roads, at distances of from two to five miles from
Pittsburg Landing, lay several divisions of Major-General Grant’s army
on Sunday morning. The advance line was formed by three
divisions—Brigadier-General Sherman’s, Brigadier-General Prentiss’ and
Major-General McClernand’s. Between these and the Landing lay the forces
of Brigadier-General Hurlbut and Major-General Smith, who, being absent
from severe illness, left his command to Brigadier-General W. H. L.
Wallace.

The Union advance line, beginning at the extreme left, was thus
formed:—On the Hamburg road, just north of the crossing of Lick creek,
and under bluffs on the opposite bank that commanded the position, lay
Colonel D. Stuart’s brigade of General Sherman’s division. Some three or
four miles distant from this brigade, on the lower Corinth road, between
that and the road to Purdy, lay the remaining brigades of Sherman’s
division, McDowell’s forming the extreme right of the whole advance
line. Hildebrand’s came next to it, and Buckland’s following. Next to
Buckland’s brigade, though rather behind a portion of Sherman’s, lay
Major-General McClernand’s division, and between it and Stuart’s
brigade, already mentioned as forming the extreme left,
Brigadier-General Prentiss’ division completed the line.

Back of this line, within a mile of the Landing, lay Hurlbut’s division,
stretching across the Corinth road, with W. H. L. Wallace’s to his
right. Such was the position of the Union troops at Pittsburg Landing at
daybreak on Sunday morning. Major-General Lew. Wallace’s division
arrived at about half-past seven o’clock that day.

Nearly four miles intervened between the different parts of Sherman’s
division. McClernand’s lay partially behind Sherman, and there was a gap
between him and Prentiss, which the rebels did not fail speedily to
find. The extreme left was commanded by unguarded heights, easily
approached from Corinth.

The secession army was commanded by General Johnston; Beauregard was
second in command. The three army corps were led by Hardee, Polk, and
Bragg. Breckinridge commanded the reserve.

On the evening of Friday, April 4, there had been a preliminary skirmish
with the enemy’s advance. Rumors reached the Union camp that some
officers had been taken prisoners by a considerable rebel force, near
the lines, and that pickets had been firing. A brigade, the Seventieth,
Seventy-second and Forty-eighth Ohio regiments, was sent out to
ascertain the facts. They came upon a party of rebels, perhaps a
thousand strong, and after a sharp action drove them off, losing Major
Crocket, of the Seventy-second Ohio, and two lieutenants from the
Seventieth were taken prisoners. In return the Union party took sixteen
prisoners, and drove the rebels back to a battery which they had placed
undiscovered at no great distance from the Federal lines. General Lew.
Wallace’s troops, at Crump’s Landing, were ordered out under arms; they
marched to Adamsville, half way between the river and Purdy, to hold
position there and resist any attack in that direction. The long rainy
night passed drearily and uncomfortably, but no further hostile
demonstrations were made, and it was generally supposed that the affair
had been an ordinary picket fight, presaging nothing more. On Saturday
there was more skirmishing along the advanced lines.

The secession leaders at Corinth knew that they largely outnumbered
Grant, and that no measures had been taken to strengthen the position at
Pittsburg Landing; they knew equally well, that when Buell’s entire
Kentucky army was added to Grant’s forces, they could not possibly
expect to hold their important position at Corinth. Their only hope lay
in attacking Grant before Buell arrived, and defeating his troops in
detail.

During Friday and Saturday the enemy had marched out of Corinth, about
seventy thousand strong, in three lines of battle; the first and second
extending from Owl Creek on the left to Lick Creek on the right—a
distance of about three miles, supported by the third and the reserve.
The first line, under Major-General Hardee, was constituted of his
corps, augmented on his right by Gladden’s brigade, of Major-General
Bragg’s corps, deployed in line of battle, with their respective
artillery, following immediately by the main road to Pittsburg, and the
cavalry in rear of the wings. The second line, composed of the other
troop of Bragg’s corps, followed Hardee at a distance of five hundred
yards, in the same order as the first. The army corps under General Polk
followed the second line, at the distance of about eight hundred yards,
in lines of brigades, deployed with their batteries in rear of each
brigade, moving by the Pittsburg road, the left wing supported by
cavalry. The reserve, under Brigadier-General Breckinridge, followed
closely the third line, in the same order, its right wing supported by
cavalry.


                         THE BATTLE ON SUNDAY.

As if in beautiful contrast with the terrible scenes that were soon to
follow, the holy Sabbath-day which dawned on the sixth of April was one
of unusual loveliness. The soft spring sunshine lay upon the green
slopes, breaking up their delicate green with a thousand fleeting
shadows flung downward by the young leaves. A gentle, pleasant wind
shook the budding branches, and happy birds were singing their
love-tunes in the underbrush, a touching prelude to the stern battle
music that soon put them to flight. A few fleecy clouds wreathed
themselves along the serene blue of the sky, and floated idly over the
battle field, casting transparent shadows now in some green hollow, then
upon a hill slope, till the whole field smiled like an Eden—smiled even
after the cannon belched their thunders over it. While the morning dew
was yet on the grass, the enemy began pouring the fire and smoke of a
most deadly strife over this lovely scene.

The attack commenced so suddenly and with such bitter violence, that the
enemy’s artillery was brought to bear on the outer camps almost
simultaneously with the arrival of the pickets they had driven in.

The divisions of Sherman and Prentiss, composed in a great part of
inexperienced troops, were selected and compelled to meet the first
shock of the enemy’s onset. Much confusion and panic was occasioned by
the sudden and unexpected attack, from which neither corps was able
fully to recover during the day. Both commanders exerted themselves with
bravery and skill in the trying crisis, and were soon enabled to bring
the greater part of their troops into line of battle, and check the
advance of the Confederate forces, which were then devastating the
Federal camps.

It is impossible to describe the fearful scenes that followed the first
wild onset of the enemy. Many of the sick and wounded, and the more
tardy officers and men were shot in their tents and left for dead, lying
through the whole of this fearful struggle, gasping in their agony. On
Monday evening some of these poor fellows were found in the riddled
tents, scarcely able to ask for the drink for which they were perishing.

But the Union forces were not long held at this terrible disadvantage.
As the enemy advanced in force on Sherman’s centre, and a battery opened
fire in the woods, shelling the Federal camp, the Unionists were in a
condition to respond with emphasis. Taylor’s and Waterhouse’s batteries
met this first regular attack.

Under cover of their artillery, the rebel advance, by heavy battalions
of infantry, was made obliquely to the left, across the open field in
front of the Fifty-third Ohio, while solid columns came in, direct upon
Sherman’s front. Immediately the entire line opened fire, and the battle
became general. The enemy’s design was to left-flank Sherman. To this
end he flung himself with terrific force upon Prentiss. Directly the
sound of musketry and artillery announced that Prentiss was engaged, and
at nine A. M. he was falling back. About this time Appler’s regiment
broke, followed by Munger’s regiment, and the enemy pressed forward on
Waterhouse’s battery, exposed by the disordered retreat. The three
Illinois regiments in immediate support of this battery stood for some
time, but the enemy’s advance was so impetuous and his fire so terrific
that they began to waver. While the Forty-third Illinois was in the
thickest of the iron storm, Colonel Raith received a severe wound and
fell from his horse. This threw his regiment into some disorder, and the
enemy got possession of three guns of Waterhouse’s battery.

Although the left was thus turned, and the enemy pressing the whole
line, Colonels McDowell and Buckland held their ground until ten
o’clock, A. M., when the enemy had got his artillery to the rear of the
Union left flank, and some changes became absolutely necessary. Two
regiments of Hildebrand’s brigade—Appler’s and Munger’s—had already
disappeared to the rear, and Hildebrand’s own regiment was in disorder.
Taylor’s battery—still at Shiloh—received orders to fall back as far as
the Purdy and Hamburg road; and McDowell and Buckland were directed to
adopt that road as their new line. Behr’s battery at the cross-roads,
was ordered immediately to come into battery action right. As Captain
Behr gave the order, he was shot from his horse, when the drivers and
gunners fled in confusion, carrying off the caissons, and abandoning
five out of the six guns. The enemy pressed on after gaining this
battery, and the Unionists were again forced to choose a line of
defence. Hildebrand’s brigade had substantially disappeared from the
field, though he himself bravely remained. McDowell’s and Buckland’s
brigades still maintained their organizations, and joined McClernand’s
right, thus abandoning the original camps and line.

General Prentiss, too, brave, eager, and resolute to retrieve lost
ground, reformed his lines under the hot fire of the enemy, without a
choice of position, and in the full raking fire of the foe, hid in the
scrub oak jungles, which gave them secure covert. If his troops had
cowered at first, the remainder of his division held their position and
braved the galling fire it was impossible to return with the heroism of
old veterans. Hildebrand and McDowell were compelled to withdraw their
brigades from their camps to a ravine behind them, but they made a
gallant defence, while Buckland’s men fell back, and McClernand threw
forward his left, supporting them.

It is hardly to be wondered that the raw regiments broke under this
appalling fire, before which veteran troops were powerless to stand. Yet
it must be said that Hildebrand’s brigade gave way with unreasonable
panic. Colonel Hildebrand himself was cool and self-possessed as any man
that ever led a hostile force. He made a powerful effort to keep his
troops in place when he saw them giving way; but the power of a single
man is unavailing when panic seizes the masses. Still this brave hero
kept his individual regiment in force a full hour after Appler’s and
Munger’s regiments had retired from their proper field of action, and
thus a larger portion of his forces were scattered and drifted away from
the contest.

Prentiss still fought valiantly, but down on either flank came the enemy
in an overwhelming rush, and a wall of bayonets closed him in on either
side. It was an appalling situation. The enemy made vigorous use of his
advantage. They had driven two divisions from their camps and nearly
opened a passage to the river. Here it was, between nine and ten
o’clock, that McArthur’s brigade of W. H. L. Wallace’s division came up
to give assistance to Stuart’s brigade, of Sherman’s division, now in
imminent danger of being cut off. Mistaking the way, McArthur marched
far to the right, and instead of reaching Stuart, came in on the other
side of the rebels, now closely pushing Prentiss. His men at once opened
vigorously on the enemy, and for a time they seemed likely to save the
imperilled division. But coming unawares upon the enemy, their positions
were not well chosen, and the whole force was compelled to fall back
together.


                          HURLBUT’S DIVISION.

Hurlbut’s division, in reserve, saved the first repulse from proving an
absolute defeat, by offering a line behind which the discomfited
divisions of Sherman and Prentiss could reform, while his solid ranks
were a wall of steel against which the enemy could not prevail. The
General, in his report, says of their five hours’ service:

“Receiving from General Prentiss a pressing request for aid, I took
command in person of the first and third brigades, respectively
commanded by Colonel N. G. Williams, of the Third Iowa, and
Brigadier-General Lauman. The first brigade consisted of the Third Iowa,
Forty-first Illinois, Twenty-eighth Illinois and Thirty-second Illinois.
The third brigade was composed of the Thirty-first and Forty-fourth
Indiana, the Seventeenth and Twenty-fifth Kentucky.

“In addition, I took with me the first and second battalions of the
Fifth Ohio cavalry; Mann’s light battery of four pieces commanded by
first Lieutenant E. Brotzmann; Ross’ battery of the Second Michigan; and
Meyer’s battery of the Thirteenth Ohio.

“I formed my line of battle—the first brigade thrown to the front on the
southerly side of a large open field—the third brigade continuing the
line with an obtuse angle around the other side of the field, and
extending some distance into the brush and timber. Mann’s battery was
placed in the angle of the lines, Ross’ battery some distance to the
left, and the Thirteenth Ohio battery on the right, and somewhat
advanced in cover of the timber, so as to concentrate the fire upon the
open ground in front, and waited for the attack.”

At half-past seven o’clock, when Brigadier-General Sherman was attacked
in force and heavily upon his left, Colonel I. C. Veatch, commanding the
second brigade of General Hurlbut’s division, was ordered to proceed to
the left of General Sherman. This brigade, consisting of the
Twenty-fifth Indiana, Fourteenth, Fifteenth, and Forty-sixth Illinois,
was in march in ten minutes, arrived on General Sherman’s left and went
into action rapidly. In a few minutes they were in line of battle, and
moving forward to the attack. But the brigade had hardly left the camp
before it found the roads full of flying Unionists, and the route for
two miles was strewn with guns, knapsacks, and blankets. The front had
been completely surprised; nearly a whole division was scattered and
retreating in utter confusion, and the enemy in force was already a mile
within the Federal camps. The brigade, under command of Colonel Veatch,
was drawn up in line of battle in a skirt of timber, bordering a large
field, on the outer edge of which the Federal troops were engaging the
enemy. But the enemy pressed on in overwhelming force, and just as the
troops in front began to waver, they discovered that he had flanked
Veatch on the right and was rapidly advancing to attack the brigade on
the right and rear.

The Fifteenth Illinois was on the right, the Fourteenth Illinois in the
centre, and the Twenty-fifth Indiana on the left—the other regiment, the
Forty-sixth Illinois, by the rapid flanking of the enemy became detached
from the brigade, and was not with it again during the action. This
brought the first fire upon the Fifteenth Illinois, which stood it
nobly, but was soon overpowered; the Fourteenth followed with a like
result. In the mean time the troops in front and on the left were
completely routed by the enemy, and came pell mell through the Union
lines, causing some little confusion. Hardly had they passed through to
the rear before the enemy came rushing on, and the fire of musketry
became terrific. There was no resisting this fiery onset short of
annihilation; so with a few well-directed volleys the brigade left the
field. The loss was very heavy. All the field officers of the
Twenty-fifth Illinois were killed instantly; two lieutenants were killed
and three wounded.


                         M’CLERNAND’S DIVISION.

McClernand’s division lay a short distance in the rear, and with one
brigade stretching out to the left of Sherman’s line. Properly speaking,
merely from the location of the camp, he did not belong to the front
line. Two-thirds of his division were entirely behind Sherman. But as
the latter fell back, McClernand was compelled to bear the shock of
battle.

His division was composed as follows:—First brigade, Colonel Hare
commanding, Eighth and Eighteenth Illinois, Eleventh and Thirteenth
Iowa; Second brigade, Colonel C. C. Marsh commanding, Eleventh,
Twentieth, Forty-eighth and Forty-fifth Illinois, Colonels Ransom,
Marsh, Haynie and Smith (the latter was the “Lead Mine regiment”); Third
brigade, Colonel Raith commanding, Seventeenth, Twenty-ninth and
Forty-ninth Illinois, Lieutenant-Colonels Wood, Farrell and Pease, and
Forty-third Illinois, Colonel Marsh. Besides this fine show of
experienced troops, they had Schwartz’s, Dresser’s, McAllister’s and
Waterhouse’s batteries.

McClernand was at once in the hottest of the fight. As Buckner’s brigade
fell back, the protecting woods grew thinner and storms of grape swept
over them like the blasts of a tornado. Lieutenant-Colonel Canfield,
commanding the Seventy-second Ohio, was mortally wounded, and borne
dying from the field. Colonel Sullivan, of the Forty-eighth Ohio, was
wounded, but continued at the head of his men. Company officers fell in
numbers and were carried away from the field. The rebels, by a sudden
dash, had taken part of Waterhouse’s battery, which McClernand had sent
over. Behr’s battery, too, was taken, and Taylor’s Chicago Light
Artillery was terribly exposed, and compelled to retire with heavy loss.
As the troops gave way they came out from the open woods into old
fields, completely raked by the enemy’s fire. For them all was lost, and
away went Buckner’s and Hildebrand’s brigades, Ohioans and Illinoisans
together, to the rear and right.

McDowell’s brigade had fallen back less slowly than its two companions
of the same division. It was now left entirely alone. Having formed the
extreme right, it had no support there; its supporting brigades on the
left had gone; and through the space they had occupied the rebels were
pouring furiously. In imminent danger of being entirely cut off, they
fell back among the ravines that border Snake creek.

Sherman was indefatigable in collecting and reorganizing his men, and a
contest was kept up along portions of his new lines. The General bore
with him one token of the danger to which he had so recklessly exposed
himself—a musket ball through the hand. It was a miracle that he escaped
so slightly, for his courage had been conspicuous. He had dared death
fifty times since the attack was made on his raw division that memorable
Sunday morning.

Now the great force of the enemy fell on McClernand’s right. As Sherman
fell back, McClernand was compelled to bring in his brigades to protect
his left against the onset of the rebels, who, seeing how he had
weakened himself, hurled themselves against him with tremendous force. A
couple of new regiments, the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Iowa, were brought
up; but taking utterly raw troops on the field, under heavy fire, was
too severe a trial, and they gave way in confusion. Then the whole
division made a change of front, and faced along the Corinth road. Here
the batteries were placed in position, and till ten o’clock the rebels
were foiled in every attempt to gain the road.

But Sherman having now fallen back there was nothing to prevent the
enemy from coming in further out on the road, and turning McClernand’s
right. Prompt to seize the advantage, a rebel brigade dashed audaciously
through the abandoned camp of the division, pushing up the road in order
to come in above McClernand. Where Sherman had been, a battery of rifled
guns was turned upon them, hurling fearful slaughter in their midst and
driving them back.

But the enemy managed his reserves with great skill. A constant advance
of fresh regiments proved overwhelming, and the storm of death swept
many a brave Union officer away. Death after death was proclaimed,
disaster followed disaster with disheartening quickness.

This was about half-past ten A. M., at which time the enemy had made a
furious attack on General McClernand’s whole front. He struggled
determinedly; but finding him severely pressed, Sherman moved McDowell’s
brigade directly against the left flank of the enemy, forced him back
some distance, and then directed the men to avail themselves of every
cover—trees, fallen timber, and a wooded valley to the right. The
brigade held this position for four long hours, sometimes gaining and at
others losing ground, Generals McClernand and Sherman acting in perfect
concert, and struggling to maintain this line.

By eleven o’clock, many of the commanders of regiments had fallen, and
in some cases not a single field officer remained; yet the fighting
continued with desperate earnestness—the fearful contest on both sides
was for death or victory. The almost deafening sound of artillery, and
the rattle of the musketry, were all that could be heard. The men stood
and bravely delivered their fire, regardless of the thunders of
artillery and the storm of iron missiles that raked through them. Foot
by foot the ground was contested. The wounded fell in heaps on the
battle field. There was no easy transportation at hand, but such means
as the soldiers could invent were adopted, and their wounded comrades
carried to the rear. Many who were hurt fell back without help, while
others fought in the ranks until they were actually forced back by their
company officers.

Major Eaton, commanding the Eighteenth Illinois, was killed; Colonel
Haynie was severely wounded; Colonel Raith, commanding a brigade, had
his leg so shattered that amputation was necessary; Major Nevins, of the
Eleventh Illinois, was wounded; Lieutenant-Colonel Ransom, of the same
regiment, was wounded; three of General McClernand’s staff—Major
Schwartz, Major Stewart and Lieutenant Freeman—were wounded, and carried
from the field. Line officers had suffered heavily. The batteries were
broken up—Schwartz had lost half his guns and sixteen horses. Dresser
had lost several of his rifled pieces, three caissons and eighteen
horses. McAllister had lost half his twenty-four pound howitzers.

[Illustration:

  DESPERATE HAND-TO-HAND FIGHT OVER SCHWARTZ’S BATTERY.
]

The soldiers fought bravely to the last—bravely as ever men fought—but
they were at a terrible disadvantage. Gradually they began falling back,
making a determined resistance; occasionally they rallied and repulsed
the enemy for a hundred yards, then were beaten back again, renewing the
retreat to some new position for fresh defence.

By eleven o’clock the division was back in a line with Hurlbut’s. It
still did some gallant fighting; once its right swept round and drove
the enemy before it for a considerable distance, but again fell back; at
last it brought up near the position of W. H. L. Wallace’s division.

Now Prentiss, Sherman and McClernand were driven back, and their camps
were all in the hands of the enemy. The whole front line, for which
Hurlbut and Wallace were but the reserves, was gone.

Sherman’s brigade, on the extreme left, was doubly left alone by the
Generals. General Grant did not arrive on the field until each division
General had been in action, and the respective Generals had in the best
manner they could, carried on the battle; but this brigade was even left
by its division General, who was four miles away, doing his utmost to
rally his panic-stricken regiments there.

It was commanded by Colonel David Stuart, and was composed of the
Fifty-fifth Illinois, Lieutenant-Colonel Malmbourg, commanding;
Seventy-first Ohio, Colonel Rodney Mason; the Fifty-fourth Ohio
(Zouaves), Colonel T. K. Smith. It was posted along the circuitous road
from Pittsburg Landing, up the river to Hamburg, some two miles from the
Landing, and near the crossing of Lick Creek, the bluffs on the opposite
side of which commanded the position, and stretching on down to join
Prentiss’ division on its right.

When the rebels marched out from Corinth, a couple of brigades (rumored
to be under the command of Breckinridge), had without molestation
reached the bluffs of Lick Creek, commanding Stuart’s position.

During the attack on Prentiss, Stuart’s brigade was formed along the
road, the left resting near the Lick Creek ford, the right,
Seventy-first Ohio, Colonel Rodney Mason, being nearest Prentiss. The
first intimation they had of disaster to their right was the partial
cessation of firing. An instant afterwards, muskets were seen glimmering
among the leaves, and presently a rebel column emerged from a bend in
the road, with banners flying, and moving at double-quick toward them.
Their supports to the left were more remote than the rebels, and it was
evident that, with but one piece of artillery, a single regiment could
do nothing there. They accordingly fell back toward the ford, and were
reinforced in an orchard near the other regiments.

The rebel column veered on further to the right, and for a brief space,
though utterly isolated, they remained unmolested.

Before ten, however, the brigade, which stood listening to the wild roar
of battle on the left, was startled by a shell that hurtled directly
over their heads. In an instant the rebel batteries that had gained the
commanding bluffs opposite, by approaching on the Corinth and Hamburg
road, were in fiery play. The orchards and open fields in which they
were posted, looking only for an attack in the opposite direction, were
swept with the exploding shells and a hail-storm of grape.

Under cover of this fire from the bluffs, the rebels rushed down,
crossed the ford, and in a moment were seen forming on the creek, in
open fields, and within close musket range. Their color-bearers stepped
defiantly to the front, as the engagement opened. The storm came in
sharp and quick volleys of musketry, the batteries above supporting them
with a destructive fire. The Union sharpshooters panted to pick off the
audacious rebel color-bearers, but Colonel Stuart interposed,—crying
out, “No, no, they are too brave fellows to be killed.” Almost at the
first fire, Lieutenant-Colonel Barton S. Kyle, of the Seventy-first, was
shot through the breast. The brigade stood firmly at least ten minutes,
when it became evident that its position was untenable, and it fell
rapidly back, perhaps a quarter of a mile, to the next ridge; a few of
Stuart’s men, at great personal risk, carrying Lieutenant-Colonel Kyle,
in a dying condition, from the field they were abandoning. Ohio lost no
braver, truer man that day.

When they reached the next woody ridge, rebel cavalry, that had crossed
the creek lower down, were seen coming up on the left; and the line of
battle was formed fronting in that direction, to resist this new attack.
For three-quarters of an hour the brigade kept this position. The
cavalry, finding it prepared, did not come within range. In front they
were hard pressed, and the rebels began to come in on their right.
Colonel Stuart had sent across to Brigadier-General W. H. L. Wallace,
then not engaged, for support. Brigadier-General McArthur’s brigade was
promptly started across, but mistaking the way, and bearing too much to
the right, found itself in the midst of the rebel forces. He vigorously
engaged the rebels to his front and flanks, fell back to a good position
and held these troops in bay till the rest of his division came up.
General McArthur was himself disabled by a wound in the foot, but he
rode to a hospital, had it dressed, and returned to the brigade, which
meantime held its position stoutly.

But this brought Stuart’s isolated brigade little assistance. They were
soon forced to fall back to another ridge, then to another, and,
finally, about twelve o’clock, shattered and broken, they retreated to
the right and rear, falling in behind General McArthur’s brigade to
reorganize. Colonel Stuart was himself wounded by a ball through his
right shoulder, and the loss of field and company officers greatly
disheartened the troops.


              DESPERATE CONDITION OF THE NATIONAL TROOPS.

Now the entire front was cleared. The enemy had full possession of
Sherman’s, Prentiss’ and McClernand’s camps. By ten o’clock the whole
front, except Stuart’s brigade, had given way, and the burden of the
fight was resting on Hurlbut and W. H. L. Wallace. Before twelve,
Stuart, too, had come back, and for the time, those two divisions stood
absolutely alone between the Union army and destruction.

But truly brave men are bravest when driven to extremities. Hurlbut and
Wallace made a most gallant stand; and most of the troops from the three
scattered divisions were still to some extent available. Many of them
had wandered down the river, some to Crump’s Landing, and others even to
Savannah, to be brought back on transports. Brigades could not be
collected again, much less divisions, but the regiments were gathered
together from the loose squads wandering about, and officered, often by
men who could find scarcely a soldier of their own commands. These were
hurried to the front, and many of them did good service.

According to general understanding, in the event of an attack at
Pittsburg Landing, Major-General Lew. Wallace was to come in on the
Union right, and flank the rebels by marching across from Crump’s
Landing below.

But, as has been stated, Wallace, with his division, though all drawn up
and ready to march anywhere at a moment’s notice, was not ordered to
Pittsburg Landing till nearly twelve o’clock. Then, by mistake, he got
on the new road, four miles of marching were lost, and the circuitous
route made it a march of twelve miles before he could reach the scene of
battle. Meantime the right was almost wholly unprotected.

Fortunately, however, the rebels did not seem to have discovered the
full extent of this weakness, and their heaviest fighting was done on
the centre and left, where the Union lines were still preserved.


                          HURLBUT’S DIVISION.

Hurlbut’s division stretched across the Corinth road, facing to the
left. W. H. L. Wallace’s other brigades had gone over to assist
McArthur, and the divisions thus reunited, steadily closed the line. To
Hurlbut’s right the lines were united by the reorganized regiments that
had been resent to the field. McClernand and Sherman were both there.

Hurlbut had been encamped in the edge of a stretch of open fields,
backed with heavy timber, which lay nearest the river.

Three times during those long hours the heavy rebel passes on the left
charged upon the division, and three times were they repulsed with
terrible slaughter. Close, sharp, continuous musketry filled the air
with fire and smoke—whole lines belched their furious fire on the
rebels, and a leaden storm swept the fields over which they attempted to
advance with terrible fury. No troops could have withstood this deadly
fire. Rebel discipline gave way under it, though dead bodies left
scattered over the field, even on Monday evening, bore ghastly testimony
to the daring with which they had been precipitated towards the Federal
lines.

The rebel generals handled their forces with a skill that extorted
admiration even from their enemies. Repulse was nothing to them; if a
rush on the Union lines failed, they took their disordered troops to the
rear, and sent up fresh forces, who ignorant of the deadly reception
that awaited them, were ready to make a new trial. Hurlbut’s jaded
division was compelled to yield at last, and after six hours’
magnificent fighting, it fell back of its camps to a point within half a
mile of the landing.


                          WALLACE’S DIVISION.

Hurlbut’s companion division—that of Brigadier-General W. H. L. Wallace,
included the Second and Seventh Iowa, Ninth and Twenty-eighth Illinois,
and several of the other regiments composing Major-General Smith’s old
division. Wallace had also three excellent batteries—Stone’s,
Richardson’s and Weber’s, all from Missouri.

With him, too, the fight began about ten o’clock, as already described.
From that time till four in the afternoon his troops bore up manfully.
The musketry fire was absolutely continuous; there was scarcely a moment
that some part of the line was not pouring in their rattling volleys,
and the artillery sent forth its death-thunders with but little
intermission through the entire time.

Once or twice the infantry advanced, attempting to drive back the
continually increasing enemy; but though they could hold their own
ground, their numbers were unequal to the task of conquering more.

Four separate times in turn the rebels attempted to charge on them. Each
time the infantry poured in its quickest volleys, the artillery
redoubled its exertions, and the rebels retreated with heavy slaughter.
The division was eager to remain, even when Hurlbut fell back, and the
noble fellows serving the guns were particularly indignant when
compelled to silence their own batteries. But their supports were gone
on both sides. It was madness to remain in isolated advance. Just as the
necessity for retreating was becoming apparent, General Wallace, whose
cool, collected bravery had commanded universal admiration, was, as it
was believed, mortally wounded, and borne away from the field. At last
the division fell back. Its soldiers claim the proud distinction of
being the last to yield, in the general breaking up of the lines that
gloomy Sunday afternoon.

Captain Stone could not resist the temptation of stopping, as he passed
what had been Hurlbut’s headquarters, to try a few parting shots. He did
fine execution, but his wheel horses were shot down, and he narrowly
escaped losing his guns.

With the first dash of the enemy on the left wing, it became evident
that a stupendous effort would be put forth to break through it. For two
hours sheets of fire blazed from both columns, and clouds of smoke
surged up between them with the rush and stifling effect of a prairie
fire. The Mississippi riflemen in the enemy’s ranks fought with terrible
valor, which was met with steady heroism by those who stood firmly under
their unerring fire. Three different times the enemy seemed on the verge
of a victory. They drove the Union forces slowly before them until they
came in sight of the river, but up to three o’clock the desperate
attempt to break the Federal lines proved unavailing. Having failed to
drive in the main columns, they had turned with furious strength on the
right wing; baffled there, they made another onset on the left wing,
fighting more desperately than ever. But the Union lines were prepared
for the assault, fierce as it was, and met it with wonderful steadiness.

The whole army was crowded into Wallace’s camps, and confined in a
circuit of from half to two-thirds of a mile around the Landing. The
Union army fighting bravely, had been falling back inch by inch all day.
The next repulse threatened to drive them into the river.

Brigadier-General Prentiss and three regiments with him—the Twenty-third
Missouri, of his own division, and the Twelfth and Fourteenth Iowa, of
those that had come to his assistance—delayed their retreat too long,
having relied too confidently on their supporting division to check a
flank movement of the enemy. Almost before they saw their danger, the
flanking forces rushed in from either side behind them, and they stood,
perhaps two thousand strong, in the midst of thrice their number. Hedged
in with battalions, with a forest of steel bristling on every side,
these brave men yielded to the force of numbers, and were taken
prisoners, after fighting bravely till further contest would have been
self-murder.

Meantime Sherman’s brigades had maintained a confused fight. Buckland’s
were almost gone, Hildebrand’s and McDowell’s were holding their ground
more tenaciously.

General Hurlbut gives a clear statement of the retreat and final
position of the Federal forces on Sunday afternoon:

“When, about three o’clock, Colonel Stewart, on my left, sent me word
that he was driven in, and that I would be flanked in a few moments, it
was necessary for me to decide at once to abandon either the right or
left. I considered that General Prentiss could, with the left of General
McClernand’s troops, probably hold the right, and sent him notice to
reach out toward the right, and drop back steadily parallel with my
first brigade, while I rapidly moved General Lauman from the right to
the left, and called up two twenty-pound pieces of Major Cavender’s
battalion to check the advance of the enemy upon the first brigade.
These pieces were taken into action by Dr. Corvine, the surgeon of the
battalion, and Lieutenant Edwards, and effectually checked the enemy for
half an hour, giving me time to draw off my crippled artillery, and to
form a new front with the third brigade. In a few minutes, two Texas
regiments crossed the ridge separating my line from Stuart’s former one,
while other troops also advanced.

“Willard’s battery was thrown into position, under command of Lieutenant
Wood, and opened with great effect on the Lone Star flags, until their
line of fire was obstructed by the charge of the third brigade, which,
after delivering its fire with great steadiness, charged up the hill,
and drove the enemy back three or four hundred yards. Perceiving that a
heavy force was closing on the left, between my line and the river,
while heavy firing continued on the right and front, I ordered the line
to fall back. The retreat was made steadily, and in good order. I had
hoped to make a stand on the line of my camp, but masses of the enemy
were pressing on each flank, while their light artillery was closing
rapidly in the rear. On reaching the twenty-four-pounder siege guns in
battery, near the river, I again succeeded in forming line of battle in
rear of the guns, and, by direction of Major-General Grant, I assumed
command of all troops that came up. Broken regiments and disordered
battalions came into line gradually upon my division.

“Major Cavender posted six of his twenty-pound pieces on my right, and I
sent my aid to establish the light artillery, all that could be found,
on my left. Many officers and men, unknown to me, fled in confusion
through the line. Many gallant soldiers and brave officers rallied
steadily on the new line. I passed to the right and found myself in
communication with General Sherman, and received his instructions. In a
short time the enemy appeared on the crest of the ridge, led by the
Thirteenth Louisiana, but were cut to pieces by the steady and murderous
fire of our artillery.”

The enemy were in possession of nearly all the Union camps and camp
equipage. Half the field artillery had fallen into his hands; a division
general had been captured—many officers had followed him, and more than
one regiment of soldiers had been made prisoners. The battle field was
cumbered at every step with killed and wounded; the hospital tents were
overflowing and crowded with human agony. A long ridge bluff set apart
for surgical purposes swarmed with the maimed, the dead and the dying,
whose cries and groans broke fearfully through the pauses of the
artillery. A dogged, stubborn resolution took possession of the men;
regiments had lost their favorite officers; companies had been bereft of
their captains. Still they continued to fight desperately, but with
little hope.

At three o’clock the gunboat Tyler opened fire on the enemy, and at four
the Lexington came up, taking position half a mile above the landing,
and opened fire, striking terror into the ranks of the enemy.

General Grant was confident that his troops could hold the enemy off
till morning, and said this while standing with his staff in a group by
the old log post-office on the landing, which was then crowded with
surgeons and the wounded; but still the men fought with a despairing
light in their eyes.

In a time like this, minutes count for years. General Grant used them to
a golden purpose. Colonel Webster, chief of staff, and an artillery
officer of ability, had arranged all the guns he could collect in a sort
of semi-circle, protecting the Landing, and bearing chiefly on the Union
centre and left, by which the rebels were pretty sure to advance. Corps
of artillerists to man them were improvised from all the batteries that
could be found. Twenty-two guns in all were placed in position. Two of
them were very heavy siege guns, long thirty-two’s. Where they came
from, what battery they belonged to, no man questioned. It was quite
unimportant. Enough that they were there, in the right place, half a
mile back from the bluff, sweeping the approaches by the left, and by
the ridge Corinth road, but with few to work them. Dr. Corvine, surgeon
of Frank Blair’s First Missouri Artillery, proffered his services, which
were gladly accepted, and he worked them with terrible effect.

It was half-past four o’clock—perhaps later still. Every division of the
Union army on the field had been repulsed. The enemy occupied almost all
their camps. The struggling remnant of Federal troops had been driven to
within little over half a mile of the Landing. Behind was a deep, rapid
river. In front was a victorious enemy. Still there was an hour for
fighting. O, that night or Lew. Wallace would come! Nelson’s division of
Buell’s army evidently could not cross in time to save the day. No one
could tell why Lew. Wallace was not on the ground. In the justice of a
righteous cause, and in that semi-circle of twenty-two guns in position,
lay all the hope these beleagured men could see.

At five o’clock the artillery which had been thundering so stormily,
held its fire a little; the flash of muskets from the enemy’s lines died
away, and his columns fell back on the centre for nearly a mile. With a
sudden swoop they wheeled and again threw their entire force on the left
wing, determined to end the fearful contest of the day then and there.

Suddenly a broad, sulphurous flash of light leaped out from the
darkening woods, and through the glare and smoke came whistling leaden
hail. The rebels were making their crowning effort for the day, and as
was expected, they came from the left and centre. They had wasted their
fire at one thousand yards. Instantaneously a new tempest from the
black-mouthed Union guns flung out its thunderous response. The rebel
artillery opened, and shell and round shot came tearing across the open
space back of the bluff. The Union infantry poured in a glorious
response from their broken battalions, invigorated by the announcement
that the advance of Buell’s army was in sight. Just then a body of
cavalry appeared across the Tennessee river, waiting transportation. In
their extremity the soldiers turned their eyes anxiously that way. Was
it Buell—was it Nelson coming to the rescue?


                       ARRIVAL OF GENERAL BUELL.

The eyes of those weary soldiers brighten. Their courage revived. Help
was near. Even in that lurid atmosphere they could see the gleaming of
the gun-barrels amid the leaves and undergrowth down the opposite side
of the river. They caught hopeful glimpses of the steady, swinging tramp
of trained soldiers. A division of Buell’s army was coming up.

Then came a boat across with a lieutenant and two or three privates of
the Signal Corps. Some orders were given the officer, and as instantly
telegraphed to the other side by the mysterious wavings and raisings and
droppings of the flags. A steamer came up with pontoons on board, with
which a bridge could be speedily thrown across the river.

She quietly reconnoitered a few moments, and steamed back again.
Perhaps, after all, it was better to have no bridge there. It made
escape impossible, and left nothing but victory or death to the
struggling Union troops. Preparations were rapidly made for crossing
General Nelson’s division, (for he had the advance of Buell’s army,) on
the dozen transports that had been tied up along the bank.

The division of W. H. L. Wallace held the enemy at bay in his last
desperate effort to break the Union lines. While forcing through a
cross-fire, General Wallace fell mortally wounded. Brigadier-General
McArthur took the command, but he too was wounded, and Colonel Tuttle,
as senior in rank, rallied the shattered brigades. He was joined by the
Thirteenth Iowa, Colonel Crooker; Ninth Illinois, Colonel Mersy; Twelfth
Illinois, Lieutenant-Colonel Chatlain, and several other fragments of
regiments, and forming them in line on the road, held the enemy in check
until that noble line was formed that breasted that last desperate
charge.

At this critical moment a long, loud shout from the Union forces
welcomed in the reinforcements. Eight thousand strong had at length
crossed the river, and swept down upon the battle-field. Buell and
Nelson, by forced marches, made within sound of the booming thunders of
artillery, reached the battle-field just as the fate of war trembled in
the balance. There was no pause for rest or council. So eager were they
for the strife, they scarcely paused for breath before a line of battle
was formed which decided that stormy day’s fight.

The men, weary from the long march, and panting from the speed which had
marked its last stages, ranged themselves in advance of the exhausted,
but unfaltering troops of Sherman, McClernand, Hurlbut and of W. H. L.
Wallace, who lay dying on the battle-field, while Colonel Tuttle led his
brigades to their noble work.

The gunboats Tyler, Lieutenant Gwinn commanding, and Lexington, James W.
Shirk commanding, now steamed up to the mouth of the little creek, near
which Stuart’s brigade had lain in the morning, and where the rebels
were attacking the Union left. When they reached the mouth of the stream
the boats rounded to, commanding a ravine cut through the bluff, as if
for the passage of their shells, which poured destruction into the ranks
of the enemy. This movement was made under the direction of General
Hurlbut, and it soon swept the enemy’s ranks, carrying terror with every
burst of deadly iron the guns belched forth.

Eager to avenge the death of their commanding General (now known to have
been killed a couple of hours before), and to complete the victory they
believed to be within their grasp, the rebels had incautiously ventured
within reach of their most dreaded antagonists, as broadside after
broadside of seven-inch shells and sixty-four-pound shot soon taught
them. This was a foe they had hardly counted on, and the unexpected fire
in flank and rear produced a startling effect. The boats fired
admirably, and with a rapidity that was astonishing. The twenty-two land
guns kept up their stormy thunder; and thus, amid the crash and roar,
the scream of shells and demon-like hiss of minie balls, that Sabbath
evening wore away.

Startled by the accumulated force, and disheartened by the fearful
combinations against them, the rebels fell slowly back, fighting as they
went, until they reached an advantageous position, somewhat in the rear,
yet occupying the main road to Corinth. The gunboats kept pouring a
storm of shell on their track, until they retired completely out of
reach, and the battle of the first day ended.

As the sounds of battle died away, and division generals drew off their
men, a council of war was held, and it was decided that as soon as
possible after daybreak the enemy should be attacked and driven from
their snug quarters in the Union camps. Lew. Wallace, who was coming in
on the new road from Crump’s Landing, and crossing Snake Creek just
above the Illinois Wallace’s (W. H. L.) camps, was to take the right and
sweep back toward the position from which Sherman had been driven on
Sunday morning. Nelson was to take the extreme left. Buell promised to
place Crittenden next to Nelson, and McCook next to him, by a seasonable
hour in the morning. The gap between McCook and Lew. Wallace was to be
filled with the reorganized divisions of Grant’s army; Hurlbut coming
next to McCook, then McClernand, and Sherman closing the gap between
McClernand and Lew. Wallace.

[Illustration:

  BATTLE OF PITTSBURG LANDING, APRIL 6, 1862.
]

From the first fearful onslaught upon Buckland’s brigade, which,
gathering up its shattered regiments, and firing as they ran, to form in
the heavy woods, leaving winrows of slain on their track, to the last
outburst of shot and shell from the gunboats, the contest of that day
had been a fearful one. Most of the troops which received the first
shock of battle were raw recruits, just from the camp of instruction.
Hundred and hundreds of them had never seen a gun fired save in sport in
their lives. With officers equally inexperienced, admitting brilliant
exceptions, it is not wonderful that the ranks were broken and driven
back when the terrific roar of cannon burst in their midst, and
bombshells scattered fire and death among the tents, in which they were
quietly sleeping but an hour before. Springing to arms, half prepared
only to rush through the blinding smoke to meet the serried columns of
the rebels’ impetuous advance—truly it is not strange that they fell
into confusion, fighting blindly and at random. But it was a grand sight
when Sherman dashed along the lines, shouting encouragement to the men,
exposing his own life a hundred times, and rallying his forces with a
wonderful power of voice and action. The herculean exertions of this
brave man no doubt saved the division from utter destruction.

From the first tranquil opening of that beautiful day to its lurid and
bloody close more desperate bravery has seldom been exhibited. When
Americans meet Americans, all that is heroic and daring in the national
character springs to action, and deeds are done on both sides that
thrill the nation as it stands breathlessly listening, North and South,
to know how her sons have fought.


                     NIGHT BETWEEN THE TWO BATTLES.

In dead silence the troops took their new position, and lay down on
their arms in line of battle. All night long the remainder of Buell’s
men were marching up from Savannah to a point opposite Pittsburg
Landing, whence they were brought over in transports. An hour after dark
Wallace came in with his division. There had been delay in getting the
right road, which made him late on the field. But once there he fell to
work with energy. He ascertained the position of certain rebel batteries
which lay in front of him on the right, and threatened to bar his
advance in the morning, and selected positions for a couple of his
batteries from which they could silence the enemy. In placing his guns
and arranging his brigades for support, he was occupied till one o’clock
in the morning. His wearied men had lain down to snatch a few hours of
sleep, with the shadows of death all around them.

At nine o’clock all was hushed near the landing. Men still panting from
the hot contest of the day, threw themselves on the earth to sleep or
die as they chanced to be unhurt or wounded unto death. The bright stars
looked down upon the ranks of sleeping, dying and dead men, with sweet
Sabbath-like calm, and never did the stars of heaven brood over a
spectacle more appalling. The sound of marching troops from the far
distance alone broke the solemn stillness, save when the moans of the
wounded, and the agonizing cries for water thrilled the night with
sounds of anguish. Now a flash shed a flood of sheet-lightning over the
river, turning its waters to lurid fire, and the roar of heavy naval
guns reverberated on the bluffs, breaking up the sublime silence of the
night. Again and again the guns boomed great volumes of sound. By the
flashes, the gunboats could be seen receding back into the fiery blue of
the waters with each graceful recoil produced by the discharge. A thin
veil of smoke settled around them, floating drowsily between their black
hulls and the beautiful stars. Far away in the distant woods came the
muffled explosion of shells thus let loose on the tranquil air.

Thus the night wore on. The soldiers, far too weary for the boom of
cannon to awake them, slept quietly almost as the dead were sleeping.
The wounded answered back the dismal sound with more dismal groans. At
midnight a thunder storm broke over the battle field, and the artillery
of heaven swept its fires through the sky, while the guns from the river
boomed a sullen answer. Torrents of rain fell, drenching the sleepers,
but falling cool as balm on the parched lips of the wounded, assuaging
their burning thirst and moistening their wounds.

The vigilant officers knew that half a mile off lay a victorious army,
commanded by splendid Generals, rendered ardent by a half-won conquest
which might be a victory on the morrow. For them there was little rest.
When the day broke it found these men watching. When the brain is active
men do not sleep, and the General who has divisions to command and
protect must earn success by vigilance.


                         THE BATTLE ON MONDAY.

The line of battle agreed upon for the Union forces on Monday was
this:—Right wing, Major-General Lew. Wallace; left wing,
Brigadier-General Nelson. Between these, beginning at the left,
Brigadier-Generals T. Crittenden, A. McD. McCook, Hurlbut, McClernand
and W. T. Sherman. In the divisions of the three latter were to be
included also the remains of Prentiss’ and W. H. L. Wallace’s
commands—shattered and left without commanders, through the capture of
one, and the mortal wound of the other.

Buell’s three divisions were not full when the battle opened on Monday
morning, but the lacking regiments were gradually brought into the rear.
The different divisions were composed of the following forces:

BRIGADIER-GENERAL NELSON’S DIVISION.—_First Brigade_—Col. Ammon, 24th
Ohio, commanding; 36th Indiana, Col. Gross; 6th Ohio, Lieut.-Col.
Anderson; 24th Ohio, Lieut.-Col. Fred. C. Jones. _Second
Brigade_—Saunders D. Bruce, 20th Kentucky, commanding; 1st Kentucky,
Col. Enyard; 2d Kentucky, Col. Sedgwick; 20th Kentucky, Lieut.-Col. ——,
commanding. _Third Brigade_—Col. Hazen, 41st Ohio, commanding; 41st
Ohio, 6th Kentucky and 9th Indiana.

BRIGADIER-GENERAL T. CRITTENDEN’S DIVISION.—_First Brigade_—Gen. Boyle;
19th Ohio, Col. Beatty; 59th Ohio, Col. Pfyffe; 13th Kentucky, Col.
Hobson; 9th Kentucky, Col. Grider. _Second Brigade_—Col. Wm. S. Smith,
13th Ohio, commanding; 13th Ohio, Lieut.-Col. Hawkins; 26th Kentucky,
Lieut.-Col. Maxwell; 11th Kentucky, Col. P. P. Hawkins; with
Mendenhall’s regular and Bartlett’s Ohio batteries.

BRIGADIER-GENERAL MCCOOK’S DIVISION.—_First Brigade_—Brig.-Gen. Lovell
H. Rousseau; 1st Ohio, Col. Ed. A. Parrott; 6th Indiana, Col.
Crittenden; 3d Kentucky (Louisville Legion); battalions 15th, 16th and
19th regulars. _Second Brigade_—Brig.-Gen. Johnston; 32d Indiana, Col.
Willich; 39th Indiana, Col. Harrison; 49th Ohio, Col. Gibson. _Third
Brigade_—Colonel Kirk, 34th Illinois, commanding; 34th Illinois,
Lieut.-Col. Badsworth; 29th Indiana, Lieut.-Col. Drum; 30th Indiana,
Col. Bass; 77th Pennsylvania, Col. Stambaugh.

MAJOR-GENERAL LEW. WALLACE’S DIVISION—RIGHT OF ARMY.—_First
Brigade_—Col. Morgan L. Smith, commanding; 8th Missouri, Col. Morgan L.
Smith, Lieut.-Col. James Peckham, commanding; 11th Indiana, Col. George
F. McGinnis; 24th Indiana, Col. Alvin P. Hovey; Thurber’s Missouri
battery. _Second Brigade_—Col. Thayer (1st Nebraska) commanding; 1st
Nebraska, Lieut.-Col. McCord, commanding; 23d Indiana, Col. Sanderson;
58th Ohio, Col. Bausenwein; 68th Ohio, Col. Steadman; Thompson’s Indiana
battery. _Third Brigade_—Col. Chas. Whittlesey (20th Ohio) commanding;
20th Ohio, Lieut.-Col. —— commanding; 56th Ohio, Col. Peter Kinney; 76th
Ohio, Col. Chas. R. Woods; 78th Ohio, Col. Leggett.

At daylight it became evident that the gunboat bombardment through the
night had not been without a most important effect. It had changed the
position of the rebel army. The sun had gone down with the enemy’s lines
encircling the Union forces closely on the centre and left, pushing them
to the river, and leaving them little over half a mile of all the broad
space they had held in the morning. The gunboats had cut the coils and
loosened the anaconda-like constriction. Their shells had made the old
position on the extreme Union left, which the rebels had been occupying,
utterly untenable. Instead of stealing upon their foe in the night,
which was doubtless their intention, they were compelled to fall back
from point to point out of range of the shells which came dropping in;
go where they would within range, the troublesome visitors would find
them out, and they fell back beyond the inner Union camps, and thus lost
more than half the ground they had gained the afternoon before.

Less easily accounted for was a movement of theirs on the right. Here
they had held a steep bluff, covered with underbrush, as their advanced
line. Through the night they abandoned this, the best possible position
for opposing Lew. Wallace, and had fallen back across some open fields
to the scrub oak woods beyond.

To those who had looked despairingly at the prospects on Sunday evening,
it seemed unaccountable that the rebels did not open the contest by
daybreak. Their retreat before the bombshells of the gunboats, however,
explained the delay. The Union divisions were put in motion almost
simultaneously. By seven o’clock Lew. Wallace opened the day by shelling
the rebel battery, of which mention has been made, from the positions he
had selected the night before. A brisk artillery duel was followed by a
rapid movement of infantry across a shallow ravine, as if to storm; and
the rebels, enfiladed and menaced in front, limbered up and made the
opening of their Monday’s retreating.


                           NELSON’S ADVANCE.

Nelson, who was assigned the left wing, moved his division about the
same time Wallace opened on the rebel battery, forming in line of
battle, Ammon’s brigade on the extreme left, Bruce’s in the centre, and
Hazen’s to the right. Skirmishers were thrown out, and for nearly a mile
the division thus swept the country, pushing a few outlying rebels
before it, till it came upon them in force. Then a general engagement
broke out along the line, and again the rattle of musketry and thunder
of artillery echoed over the late silent fields. There was no straggling
this morning. These men were well drilled, and strict measures were
taken to prevent miscellaneous thronging back out of harm’s way. They
stood up to their work and did their duty manfully.

It soon became evident that, whether from change of commanders or some
other cause, the rebels were pursuing a new policy in massing their
forces. On Sunday the heaviest fighting had been done on the left. In
the morning they seemed to make a less determined resistance here, while
toward the centre and right the ground was more obstinately contested,
and the struggle fiercely prolonged.

Until half-past ten o’clock Nelson advanced slowly but steadily,
sweeping his long lines over the ground of defeat on Sunday morning,
moving over scores of dead rebels, and resistlessly pressing back the
jaded and wearied enemy. The rebels had received but few reinforcements
during the night. Their men were exhausted with the desperate contest of
the day before, and manifestly dispirited by the fact that they were
fighting Grant and Buell combined.

Gradually, as Nelson pushed forward his lines under heavy musketry, the
enemy fell back, till about half-past ten, when, under cover of the
heavy timber and a furious cannonading, they made a general rally. The
Union forces, flushed with their easy success, were scarcely prepared
for the sudden onset, when the rebel masses were hurled against them
with tremendous force. The men halted, wavered, and were driven back. At
this critical juncture Captain Terry’s regular battery came dashing up.
Scarcely taking time to unlimber, he was loading and sighting his pieces
before the caissons had turned, and in an instant was tossing in shell
from twenty-four-pound howitzers in to the compact and advancing rebel
ranks.

Here was the turning point of the battle on the left. The rebels were
checked, not halted. On they came. Horse after horse from the batteries
was picked off. Every private at one of the howitzers was shot down, and
the gun was worked by Captain Terry himself and a corporal. A regiment
dashed up from the Union line, and saved the disabled piece. Then for
two hours artillery and musketry raged at close range. At last the enemy
began to waver. The Federals pressed on, pouring in deadly volleys. Just
then Buell, who assumed the general direction of his troops in the
field, came up. At a glance he saw the position of things, and gave a
prompt order. “Forward at double-quick by brigades.” The men leaped
forward with the eagerness of unleashed hounds. For a quarter of a mile
the rebels fell back. Faster and faster they ran; less and less
resistance was made to the advance. At last the front camps on the left
were reached, and by half-past two that point was cleared. The rebels
had been steadily swept back over the ground they had won, with heavy
loss, and fell into confusion. The Unionists had retaken all their own
guns lost here the day before, and one or two from the rebels were left
to attest how bravely that great victory in Tennessee was won.


                   ADVANCE OF CRITTENDEN’S DIVISION.

Next to Nelson came Crittenden. He, too, swept forward over his ground
to the front some distance before finding the foe. Between eight and
nine o’clock, however, while keeping Smith’s brigade on his left even
with Nelson’s flank, and joining Boyle’s brigade to McCook on the right,
in the grand advance, he came upon the enemy with a battery in position,
and, well supported, Smith dashed his brigade forward. There was sharp,
close work with musketry, and the rebels fled. He took three pieces—a
twelve-pound howitzer and two brass six-pounders. But they cost the
gallant Thirteenth Ohio dear. Major Ben. Piatt Runkle fell, mortally
wounded.

For half an hour, perhaps, the storm raged around these captured guns.
Then came the recoiling rebel wave that had hurled Nelson back.
Crittenden, too, caught its full force. The rebels swept up to the
batteries—around them, and down after the retreating Union column. But
the two brigades, like those of Nelson’s to their left, took a fresh
position, faced the foe, and held their ground. Mendenhall’s and
Bartlett’s batteries now began shelling the infantry that alone opposed
them. Before abandoning the guns so briefly held, they had spiked them
with mud, and this novel expedient was perfectly successful. From that
time till after one o’clock, while the fight raged back and forth over
the same ground, the rebels did not succeed in firing a shot from their
mud-spiked artillery.

At last the Union brigades began to gain the advantage. Crittenden drove
the enemy steadily forward. Captain Mendenhall, with First-Lieutenant
Parsons, a Western Reserve West Pointer, with Bartlett, poured in their
shell. A rush for the contested battery, and it was taken again. The
rebels retreated towards the left. Smith and Boyle holding the infantry
well in hand, Mendenhall again got their range and poured in shell on
the new position. The fortune of the day was against them, as against
their comrades in Nelson’s front, and they were soon in full retreat.

Just then Brigadier-General Thomas J. Woods’ advance brigade from his
approaching division came up. It was too late for the fight, but it
relieved Crittenden’s weary fellows, and pushed on after the rebels
until they were found to have left the most advanced Union camps.


                           M’COOK’S ADVANCE.

Thus the left was saved. Meanwhile McCook, with his magnificent
regiments, was doing equally well toward the centre. His division was
handled in a way to save great effusion of blood, while equally
important results were attained. The reserves were kept as much as
possible from under fire, while the troops in front were engaged. Thus
the lists of killed and wounded will show that while as heavy fighting
was done here as any where on the right or centre, the casualties were
remarkably few.

An Illinois battery, serving in the division, was in imminent danger.
The Sixth Indiana was ordered to its relief. A rapid rush, close
musketry firing—no need of bayonets here—the battery was safe. The enemy
were to the front and right. Advancing and firing the Sixth pushed on.
The rebel colors dropped. Another volley; yet once more the fated colors
fell. Was there fatality in this? The rebels seemed to think so, for
they wheeled and disappeared.

Rousseau’s brigade was drawn off in splendid style. The rebel General
saw the brigade filing back, and pushed his forces onward again. Kirk’s
brigade advanced to meet him, coming out of the woods into an open
field. It was met by a tremendous fire, which threw a battalion of
regulars in its front into some confusion. They retired to reform, and
meanwhile down dropped the brigade on the ground. As the front was
cleared the men sprang up and charged across the open field, straight to
the woods, under cover, driving the enemy back with their impetuous
advance. He rallied promptly. Fierce musketry firing swept the woods.
They advanced thirty rods, perhaps, when the Twenty-ninth Indiana got
into a marsh and fell partially to the rear. Heavier came the leaden
hail. The Twenty-ninth and Thirtieth both fell back fifteen or twenty
rods; they rallied and advanced again. They were repulsed, started
impetuously forward, and this time came in on the vulnerable points.
Colonel Waggoner’s Fifteenth Indiana came up to the support and the
enemy disappeared. Fresh troops took their places, and for them the
fight ended.

Beginning at the left the waves of success swept forward from point to
point over the lost fields of Sunday. Pæans of victory, and the wild
cheers of successful soldiers sounded the requiem of the fallen rebels,
who had atoned for their treason by the brave man’s death. Nelson,
Crittenden, McCook, Hurlbut, McClernand, led their divisions bravely
through the fray. The contest lasted longer on the right, and was even
more fiercely contested.


                       LEW. WALLACE’S MOVEMENTS.

When Major-General Lew. Wallace opened the battle at seven o’clock by
shelling with enfilading fires a rebel battery, a few shots demonstrated
to the rebels that their position was untenable. The instant Sherman
came in to protect his left, Wallace advanced his infantry. The rebel
battery at once limbered up and got out of the way. The advance had
withdrawn the division from Sherman, making a left half wheel, to get
back into the neighborhood of the Federal line; they advanced some two
hundred yards, which brought them to a little elevation, with a broad
open stretch to the front. As the division halted on the crest of the
swell, through the edge of the timber, skirting the fields, the head of
a rebel column appeared, marching past in splendid style on the
double-quick. Banner after banner flashed out through the foliage; the
“Stars and Bars” forming a long line, stretching parallel with Wallace’s
line of battle. Regiment after regiment swept forward, the line
lengthened, and doubled and trebled; the head of the column was out of
sight and still they came. Twenty regiments were counted passing through
the woods. Their design was plain. The rebels had abandoned the idea of
forcing their way through the Union left, and the manifest attempt was
to turn the right.

Thompson’s and Thurber’s batteries were now ordered up, and the whole
column was shelled as it passed. The rebels threw their artillery into
position rapidly, and a brisk cannonading began. After a time, while the
fight still rested with the artillery, the rebels opened a new and
destructive battery to the right, which the Union men soon ascertained
was “Watson’s Louisiana battery,” from the marks on the ammunition boxes
the enemy were forced from time to time to leave behind.

Batteries, with a brigade of supporting infantry, were now moved forward
over open fields, under heavy fire, to contend against this new
assailant. The batteries opened, the sharpshooters were thrown out to
the front to pick off the rebel artillerists, and the brigade was
ordered down on its face to protect it from the flying shell and grape.
For an hour and a half the contest lasted, while the body of the
division was still delayed, waiting for Sherman.


                          SHERMAN’S DIVISION.

Sherman had received orders from Grant to advance and recapture his
camps. His division was composed of odds and ends, as it came out of the
conflict on Sunday evening.

His command was of a mixed character. Buckland’s brigade was the only
one that retained its organization. Colonel Hildebrand was personally
there, but his brigade was not. Colonel McDowell had been severely
injured by a fall of his horse, had gone to the river, and the regiments
of his brigade were not in line. The Thirteenth Missouri, Colonel Crafts
J. Wright, had reported itself on the field, and fought well, retaining
its regimental organization, and it formed a part of Sherman’s line
during Sunday night and all Monday. Other fragments of regiments and
companies had also fallen into his division, and acted with it during
the remainder of the battle.

This was not a very promising host with which to “advance and recapture
his camps.” Sherman, full of ardor, moved forward and reoccupied the
ground on the extreme right of General McClernand’s camp, where he
attracted the fire of a battery located near Colonel McDowell’s
headquarters. Here he remained, patiently awaiting the sound of General
Buell’s advance upon the main Corinth road. It was this independent
action of Sherman which caused Wallace to halt—he evidently not
understanding that General’s design.

By ten o’clock Sherman’s right, under Colonel Marsh, came up. He started
to move across the field, but the storm of musketry and grape was too
much for him, and he fell back in good order. Again he started on the
double-quick and gained the woods. The Louisiana battery was turned;
Marsh’s position left it subject to fire in flank and in front, and it
then fled. The other rebel batteries at once followed, and Wallace’s
division, in an instant, now that a master move had swept the board,
pushed forward. Before them were broad fallow fields, then a woody
little ravine, succeeded by cornfields and woods.

The left brigade was sent forward. It crossed the fallow fields, under
fire, gained the ravine, and was rushing across the cornfields, when the
same Louisiana steel rifled guns opened on them. Dashing forward they
reached a little ground swell, behind which they dropped like dead men,
while skirmishers were sent forward to silence the troublesome battery.
The skirmishers crept forward till they gained a little knoll, not more
than seventy-five yards from the battery. Of course the guns opened on
them. They replied to some purpose. In a few minutes the battery was
driven off, the artillerists killed, the horses shot down, and badly
crippled every way. But the affair cost the Union cause a brave
man—Lieutenant-Colonel Garber, who could not control his enthusiasm at
the conduct of the skirmishers, and in his excitement incautiously
exposed himself. All this time rebel regiments were pouring on to attack
the audacious brigade that was supporting the skirmishers, but fresh
regiments from Wallace’s division came up in time to defeat their
purpose.

The battery was silenced. “Forward” was the division order. Rushing
across the cornfields under a heavy fire, they now met the rebels face
to face in the woods. The contest was quick and decisive. Close, sharp,
continuous musketry drove the rebels back.

Here unfortunately Sherman’s right gave way. Wallace’s flank was
exposed. He instantly formed Colonel Wood’s Seventy-sixth Ohio in a new
line of battle, in right angles with the real one, with orders to
protect the flank. The Eleventh Indiana was likewise contesting a sharp
engagement with the enemy, who made a desperate attempt to flank it, and
for a time the contest waxed furious. But Sherman soon filled the place
of his broken regiments. Wallace’s division came forward, and again the
enemy gave way.

By two o’clock the division was in the woods again, and for
three-quarters of a mile it advanced under a murderous storm of shot.
Then another contest, and another with the batteries, always met with
skirmishers and sharpshooting—then by four o’clock, two hours later than
on the right, a general rebel retreat—a sharp pursuit—from which the
triumphant Union soldiers were recalled to encamp on the old ground of
Sherman’s division, in the very tents from which those regiments were
driven that hapless Sunday morning.

With great thanksgiving and shouts of triumph the Union army took
possession of the camps. They had repulsed the enemy in one of the most
hardly contested battles of the war, under many disadvantages, and with
a heroism that fills a glorious page in the history of nations. The
enemy was near, yet retreating—his columns broken and altogether
defeated. His cavalry still hovered within half a mile of the camps, but
it was allowed to depart, and the battle of Pittsburg Landing, written
by more than a hundred thousand bayonets, was at an end.


                           AFTER THE BATTLE.

The sight of that battle field was horrible. The first approaches,
occupying the further range of the enemy’s guns, bore fearful witness of
the wild devastation made by the ball and shell which had over-shot the
mark. Large trees were entirely splintered off within ten feet of the
ground; heavy branches lay in every direction, and pieces of exploded
missiles were scattered over the forest sward. The carcasses of horses
and the wrecks of wagons strewed all the woods and marked every step of
the way.

Half a mile further on, and the most terrible results of the struggle
were brought to view. Lifeless bodies lay thickly in the woods; the dead
and dying lay close together in the fields, some in heaps on their
backs, some with clenched hands half raised in air—others with their
guns held in a fixed grip, as if in the act of loading when the fatal
shaft struck them dead. Others still had crawled away from further
danger, and, sheltering themselves behind old logs, had sunk into an
eternal sleep. Here were the bodies of men who had fallen the day
before, mingled with those from whose wounds the blood was yet warmly
trickling.

Around the open space known as “The battalion drill ground,” the scene
was still more appalling. This spot had been desperately contested on
both sides; but the dead on the rebel side were four to one compared to
the Union losses. It was horrible to see in what wild attitudes they had
fallen. Here a poor creature appeared in a sitting posture, propped up
by logs, on which the green moss had been drenched with blood, and with
his hands rigidly locked over his knees, sat still as marble, with his
ashen face drooping on his breast. One poor wretch had crept away to the
woods, and ensconcing himself between two logs, spread his blanket above
him as a shield from the rain of the previous night. He was a wounded
rebel, and asked pitifully of those who searched among the dead if
nothing could be done for him.

In the track of the larger guns terrible havoc had been made, and scenes
of revolting mutilation presented themselves. The field of battle
extended over a distance of five miles in length, and three-quarters of
a mile in width. This space was fought over twice in regular battle
array, and many times in the charges and retreats of the different
divisions of the two armies. Every tree and sapling in that whole space
was pierced through and through with cannon-shot and musketballs, and it
is reported that there was scarcely a rod of ground on the five miles
which did not have a dead or wounded man upon it.

On Sunday, especially, several portions of the ground were fought over
three and four times, and the two lines swayed backward and forward like
advancing and retreating waves. In repeated instances, rebel and Union
soldiers, protected by the trees, were within thirty feet of each other.
Many of the camps, as they were lost and retaken, received showers of
balls. At the close of the fight, General McClernand’s tent contained
twenty-seven bullet-holes, and his Adjutant’s thirty-two. In the
Adjutant’s tent, when the Union forces recaptured it, the body of a
rebel was found in a sitting position. He had evidently stopped for a
moment’s rest, when a ball struck and killed him. A tree, not more than
eighteen inches in diameter, which was in front of General Lew.
Wallace’s division, bore the marks of more than ninety balls within ten
feet of the ground.


                  THE ARTILLERY AND REGIMENTS ENGAGED.

A record of the dead, wounded and missing in that fearful battle, bears
sure evidence of the almost superhuman bravery with which it was
contested.

The Illinois men, already famous at Donelson, fought like tigers to
sustain their well-earned reputation. Missouri, Ohio, Indiana,
Wisconsin, and some of the Iowa regiments, won imperishable laurels. The
First and Second Kentucky were gloriously brave in the fight. They, as
well as the Sixth, were under fire more than five hours, yet when the
enemy turned their faces toward Mississippi, they were ready and eager
to follow. The Ohio Fifty-fourth, Zouave regiment, were at their post in
the thickest of the fight. Also the Fifty-seventh, who remembered well
that Ohio expected her buckeye sons to do their duty.

Taylor’s and Waterhouse’s batteries were first in the fight. Two
regiments that should have supported the last broke and ran. Waterhouse
was wounded in the thigh by a minie ball. Taylor’s battery continued to
fight, supported splendidly by the Twenty-third Illinois, until he and
his support were outflanked on both sides.

Waterhouse, with his three guns, took up a second position, supported by
the second brigade of McClernand’s division, Colonel Marsh commanding.
During the forenoon they were compelled to retire through their own
encampment, with heavy loss, into the woods. There a second line of
battle was formed, when McClernand ordered an advance. A hundred rods
brought the solid columns within sight of the rebels, and then followed
one of the most fiercely contested and sanguinary engagements of that
desperate field. It resulted in the repulse of the rebels, who were
driven back through the Union encampments. Then the enemy was
reinforced, and Colonel Marsh, finding his ammunition nearly expended,
was compelled to retreat before the overwhelming forces of the enemy.

On Monday a fine Michigan battery, captured by the enemy the day before,
was retaken by the Sixteenth Wisconsin, at the point of the bayonet. The
fight, after taking this battery, was conducted by General Beauregard in
person. In his efforts to recover it he was wounded in the arm. He was
successful in taking it, but it was again wrested from him. This battery
was retaken and recaptured no less than six times.

Company A of the Chicago Light Artillery, so severely handled on the
first day, was only able to man three guns on Monday; but with these,
after a desperate contest, they succeeded in silencing and capturing a
rebel battery of six guns. They were, however, compelled to abandon it
from want of horses.

The report of General Lew. Wallace especially commended the Nebraska
First, the Twentieth, Fifty-eighth, Seventy-sixth and Seventy-eighth
Ohio, and the Twenty-third Indiana. The Indiana Twenty-fifth literally
covered itself with glory. The Indiana Sixth, Ninth, Eleventh,
Thirty-first, Thirty-second, Twenty-fourth, Forty-third and
Fifty-seventh all performed most honorable parts in the terrible drama.

Of the United States regulars, there was a fine representation. They
were used at those points where the utmost steadiness was demanded, and
fought with consummate skill and determination.

The losses of the Illinois regiments in McClernand’s division were very
heavy, in officers and men. On Sunday, company A, of the Forty-ninth
Illinois, lost from one volley twenty-nine men, including three
officers; and on Monday morning the company appeared on the ground
commanded by a second sergeant. General McClernand’s third brigade,
which was led by Colonel Raith until he was mortally wounded, changed
commanders three times during the battle. On Monday morning, one of
General Hurlbut’s regiments (the Third Iowa) was commanded by a first
lieutenant.

General Grant is an illustration of the fortune through which some men,
in the thickest showers of bullets, always escape. He has participated
in skirmishes and fourteen pitched battles, and is universally
pronounced, by those who have seen him on the field, daring even to
rashness; but he has never received a scratch. At four o’clock on Sunday
evening, he was sitting upon his horse, just in the rear of the Union
line of batteries, when Carson, the scout, who had reported to him a
moment before, had fallen back, and was holding his horse by the bridle,
about seven feet behind him. A six-pound shot, which flew very near
General Grant, carried away Carson’s head, passed just behind Lieutenant
Graves, volunteer aid to General Wilson, tearing away the cantle of his
saddle and cutting his clothing, but leaving him uninjured. It then took
off the legs of a soldier in one of General Nelson’s regiments, which
was just ascending the bluff.

About the same hour, further up to the right, General Sherman, who had
been standing for a moment, while Major Hammond, his chief of staff, was
holding his bridle, remounted. By the prancing of his horse, General
Sherman’s reins were thrown over his neck, and he was leaning forward in
the saddle, with his head lowered, while Major Hammond was bringing them
back over his head, when a rifle ball struck the line in Major Hammond’s
hand, severing it within two inches of his fingers, and passed through
the top and back of General Sherman’s hat. Had he been sitting upright
it would have struck his head. At another time a ball struck General
Sherman on the shoulder, but his metallic shoulder-strap warded it off.
With a third ball he was less fortunate, for it passed through his hand.
General Sherman had three horses shot under him, and ranks high among
the heroes of that nobly won battle.

General Hurlbut had a six-pound shot pass between his horse’s head and
his arm; a bullet hurtled through the animal’s mane, and one of his
horses was killed under him.

The statement has gone forth that General Prentiss was made prisoner at
the first early onslaught of the enemy, when his division was driven in
upon Sherman’s lines. But this is an error. Prentiss’ men fought well
even in retiring. They retired to reform, and pursued the conflict up to
late in the afternoon, under Prentiss’ personal lead. They maintained a
stand on McClernand’s left and Hurlbut’s right. In the thick underbrush
where they made their last stand, almost every shrub and bush was struck
by bullets; no spot on the entire field evidenced more desperate
fighting. The last time General Prentiss met General Hurlbut, he asked
him: “Can you hold your line?” General Hurlbut replied, “I think I can.”
Not long after he sent a messenger to General Prentiss, to inform him
that he was forced back, but the man was probably killed, as he never
returned or delivered the message. About the same time, McClernand was
forced back on his right, and Prentiss, without knowing that his
supports on each side were gone, held his line. The enemy, both on his
right and left, was half a mile in his rear before he discovered it, and
his capture was inevitable.

Of General Buell’s conduct in battle, one of his men wrote, “I wish you
could have seen the gallantry, the bravery, the dauntless daring, the
coolness of General Buell. He seemed to be omnipresent. If ever man was
qualified to command an army, it is he. He is a great, a _very_ great
General, and has proved himself so; not only in organizing and
disciplining an army, but in handling it. He had his horse shot under
him.”


                                LOSSES.

The official reports of losses are given in the following tabular
statement:

                             GRANT’S ARMY.

              DIVISIONS.          KILLED. WOUNDED. MISSING. TOTAL.
      1—General McClernand,           251    1,351      236  1,848
      2—General W. H. L. Wallace,     228    1,033    1,163  2,424
      3—General Lew. Wallace,          43      257        5    305
      4—General Hurlbut,              313    1,449      223  1,985
      5—General Sherman,              318    1,275      441  2,034
      6—General Prentiss,             196      562    1,802  2,760
                                    —————    —————    —————  —————
                Total,              1,349    5,927    3,870 11,356


                             BUELL’S ARMY.

      2—General McCook,                95      793        8    896
      4—General Nelson,                90      591       58    739
      5—General Crittenden,            80      410       27    517
                                    —————    —————    —————  —————
                Total,                265    1,794       93  2,152
                                    —————    —————    —————  —————
             Grand Total,           1,614    7,721    3,963 13,508

The official report of General Beauregard states the rebel loss to be
1,728 killed, 8,012 wounded, and 959 missing; which is far below the
estimated losses of the enemy given by the Federal officers, who buried
the dead on the field.

Bravely was that battle contested on both sides. We have described the
way in which the Federal Generals fought and won a victory. But the
South was gallantly represented—so gallantly, that a victory over such
men was worth a double conquest over a meaner foe.

Beauregard seemed omnipresent along his lines throughout that memorable
day, striving by expostulation, entreaties, command, exposure of his own
person, to stem the tide of defeat; but it was in vain. The steady flank
advances of the Federal wings—the solidity of their centre, rendered it
necessary to “retreat,” if he would not be cut off entirely. His baffled
and somewhat dispirited brigades fell back slowly upon the Corinth road,
which, in all the fortunes of the two days’ fight, had been carefully
guarded from any approach of the Unionists. The retreat was neither a
panic nor a rout. Some regiments threw away their arms, blankets, etc.,
from exhaustion; great numbers of killed and wounded crowded the army
wagons, and much camp equipage was necessarily left behind.

The pursuit was kept up with but little energy. The nature of the woods
rendered cavalry movements extremely difficult, and though three
thousand splendidly mounted fellows had waited two days for an order to
ride into the fray, it came too late for much service. The infantry
pushed onward only a mile or two, for being unacquainted with the
topography of the country, General Buell considered it dangerous to
pursue his advantages any farther.

In giving a record of this contest, one thing is assured—the Union
victory was won by the heroic fortitude of men, many of whom never
before had been under fire; and the field is written all over with the
records of soldiers whose unfaltering heroism gave the name of Pittsburg
Landing to the hardest fought and noblest won battle of the American
continent.




            GENERAL SHERMAN’S RECONNOISSANCE TOWARD CORINTH.

                             APRIL 8, 1862.


The fatigue and suffering experienced by the victorious army at
Pittsburg were too severe for an immediate pursuit of Beauregard’s
forces on their retreat from the battle field on the 7th of April. On
the morning of the 8th, however, General W. T. Sherman was ordered by
General Grant to follow up the enemy, with a small force. With two
brigades of infantry, and Colonel Dickey’s Illinois cavalry, he advanced
on the Corinth road, to the forks, several miles beyond the battle
field. The abandoned camps of the enemy lined the road, in all of which
were found more or less of their wounded with hospital flags thrown out
for their protection. At that point, reconnoitering parties were sent
out on both roads, which reported the enemy’s cavalry in force in either
direction. A Federal brigade under General Wood, which had been
stationed in that vicinity, was ordered to advance on the left hand
road, while General Sherman led the third brigade of his division up the
right. About half a mile from the forks was a clear field, through which
the highway passed, and immediately beyond it a space of two hundred
yards of fallen timber; beyond that an extensive camp of the enemy’s
cavalry could be seen. After a reconnoissance, the two advanced
companies of the Ohio Seventy-seventh, Colonel Hildebrand, were ordered
to deploy as skirmishers, and the regiment itself to move forward into
line, with intervals of one hundred yards. In this order they advanced
cautiously until the skirmishers were engaged.

Taking it for granted that this disposition would clear the camp, Gen.
Sherman held Colonel Dickey’s Fourth Illinois cavalry ready to charge.
The enemy’s cavalry came down boldly, breaking through the line of
skirmishers, when the regiment of infantry wavered, threw away its guns
and fled. The ground was admirably adapted to a defence of infantry
against cavalry, it being miry and covered with fallen timber. As the
regiment of infantry broke, Colonel Dickey’s cavalry began to charge
with their carbines, and fell into disorder. General Sherman instantly
sent orders to the rear for the brigade to form in line of battle, which
was promptly executed. The broken infantry and cavalry rallied on this
line, and as the enemy’s cavalry came up to it, the Union cavalry in
turn charged and drove them from the field. General Sherman then
advanced the entire brigade upon the same ground, and sent Colonel
Dickey’s cavalry a mile further on the road. On the ground which had
been occupied by the Seventy-seventh Ohio, were fifteen dead and about
twenty-five wounded. Two hundred and eighty Confederate wounded and
fifty of the Federals were found in the camp from which the enemy were
driven.

General Halleck attributed the victory at Pittsburg greatly to the
bravery and skill of General Sherman, and recommended that he should be
promoted to a Major-Generalship, which rank was conferred upon him by
the President.




                     OCCUPATION OF HUNTSVILLE, ALA.

                            APRIL 10, 1862.


On the same day that General Buell left Nashville for Pittsburg, he
dispatched General Mitchell’s division on a hazardous expedition through
Tennessee, to Huntsville, Ala.

Leaving Murfreesborough, Tenn., on the 5th of April, they marched to
Shelbyville, twenty-six miles, in twelve hours, amid a cold, drizzling
rain. They experienced a warm welcome from the inhabitants of that
beautiful city. Here they were obliged to remain two days, awaiting the
arrival of their supply train; and on the 8th, after a march of
twenty-seven miles, they reached Fayetteville, Lincoln Co., a town where
the secession sentiment was almost universal. Fifteen miles beyond they
crossed the State line and entered Alabama, continuing their course due
south. A Northern journal says:

“It stirs the blood with enthusiasm to read the exploits of General
Mitchell, in Alabama—so full are they of dash, enterprise and daring.
When the General was on his way to Bridgeport, he met a ‘native,’ whom
he asked to show him a point where a certain stream could be forded. The
Alabamian declined to furnish the information. ‘Bind him and march him
to the head of the column,’ said the General. Then every man of three
thousand in the ranks was ordered to take a rail from the adjacent
fences, and these were thrown into the river, extemporizing a bridge on
which the troops crossed. At another place, they came upon a stream
three hundred feet wide, and twenty feet deep. ‘Never mind,’ said the
General, ‘I have a pontoon bridge;’ and he ordered his men to roll down
the bales from a load of abandoned cotton near by. Some of the officers
laughed at the idea of making a bridge of such materials, but he told
them he had calculated the buoyancy of cotton, and found it to be four
hundred and eighty-six pounds to a bale. The bridge was made, and the
calculation proved correct.

[Illustration: UNION HEROES BANKS. SICKLES. DIX. McDOWELL. SHIELDS.]

“On reaching a bridge near Sunrise, it was found to be on fire, with a
piece of rebel artillery stationed to command it. General Mitchell
entered the bridge and asked who would volunteer to save it. A sergeant
of the Thirty-third Ohio sprang after him. ‘You are my man!’ said the
General. In a moment the bridge was thronged with volunteers, and they
saved it. At another place the General himself was found in the mud with
his coat off, working at a bridge on which his command crossed a swamp.”

As the army advanced, an eager curiosity became manifest to know the
point of destination. On the way, the General met a man travelling on
foot. He asked him how far it was to Huntsville.

“Eleven miles.”

“Do they know we are coming?”

“No; they have not the least idea of it.”

Huntsville, then, was the desired haven. Ten miles from the place the
General called a halt, to wait for the artillery and infantry to come
up. No tents were pitched, but for miles away the impatient invaders
could be seen around their camp-fires. The General flung himself down by
an old log, overrun with moss, and on this novel bed snatched two hours’
rest. Just as the moon was going down, the bugle call was sounded. The
soldiers sprang to their feet, and in a few minutes they were ready to
move.

The Simonson battery led the way, supported by Kennett’s and Colonel
Turchin’s brigade. The army passed a magnificent plantation, with many
negroes, owned by the rebel ex-Secretary Walker. Four miles from
Huntsville, the shrill whistle of a locomotive was heard. In a few
moments the train hove in sight, and was stopped by the outbreak of
Simonson’s brass guns. The train was captured, together with one hundred
and fifty-nine prisoners.

On to the town was the cry. Daylight was dawning, and the citizens
quietly sleeping as the foe entered the silent streets. The clattering
noise of the cavalry aroused them from their slumbers, and they flocked
to the doors and windows, exclaiming, with blanched cheeks and sinking
hearts, “They have come—the Yankees have come!” Never in the history of
any military movement was a surprise so complete. Men rushed into the
street half dressed, women fainted, children screamed, the negroes
laughed, and for a short time a scene of perfect terror reigned. This
state of affairs soon subsided, when these startled people realized that
the Union soldiers were disposed to treat them kindly.

Colonel Gazley, of the Thirty-seventh Indiana, was appointed
Provost-Marshal, and his regiment occupied the city as Provost-Guard.

At the extensive depot was found seventeen first-class locomotives, and
a great number of passenger and freight cars. At the foundry, two or
three cannon with several small arms. The General soon made good use of
the engines. Ere the close of the night, one hundred miles of the
Memphis and Charleston railroad was in his possession, stretching in one
direction as far as Stevenson, in the other as far as Decatur, capturing
at the latter place the entire camp equipage of a regiment, which left
very hastily on the approach of the Union troops.

Making Huntsville his headquarters, where he remained for six weeks,
General Mitchell rendered essential service by intercepting the enemy’s
communications, and capturing or destroying his supplies. He evinced
marked ability, and met with uniform success in fitting out many smaller
expeditions through that region of country. He extemporized a gunboat on
the Tennessee, which aided him materially when visiting the eastern side
of the river.




                      CAPTURE OF FORT PULASKI, GA.

                            APRIL 11, 1862.


Fort Pulaski, the key to the city of Savannah, stands on Cockspur
Island, at the mouth of the Savannah river, about fourteen miles below
the city. It was built by the United States Government at a cost of
nearly one million of dollars. It is of a pentagonal form, and covers
several acres of ground. The walls are forty feet high, presenting two
faces towards the sea, the ranges of fire radiating at opposite angles.
It was a position of immense strength, being constructed for a full
armament, on the lower tier, of sixty-five 32-pounders, and the upper
tier for fifty-three 24-pounders, four 18-pound flanking howitzers, one
13-inch mortar, twelve 8-inch columbiads, and seven 10-inch
mortars—altogether, one hundred and fifty guns. The interior of the fort
was well supplied with large furnaces for heating shot, quarters,
barracks, ammunition, etc.

Tybee Island, and the lighthouse, had been previously evacuated by the
rebels. The investment of Fort Pulaski was a work of great magnitude,
and long and careful preparations for its reduction were necessary.
Batteries were erected at several points, after severe labor on the part
of the Federal forces, and at the end of the month of March the final
arrangements were drawing to completion.

Cockspur Island, on which Fort Pulaski stands, is low and marshy, and
the nearest solid land is Tybee Island, lying to the seaward, and within
three-quarters of a mile distant. Tybee Island stretches out from a
point known as Goat Point, two or three miles to the sea—the nearest
point to the fort being that just named. General Q. A. Gillmore took
command at Tybee Island on February 20th, which had been previously
evacuated by the rebels, and here were built the heaviest breaching
batteries; but others were erected at intervals along the shore for a
distance of nearly two miles. The subjoined table gives their strength
and armament:

 BATTERY.  NO. OF  SIZE.     KIND.   WEIGHT. RANGE.      COMMANDER.
           GUNS.                      LBS.

 Stanton     3    13 inch. Mortar.    17,120  3,476 Captain  Skinner.

 Grant       3    13   „       „      17,120  3,256    „     Palmer.

 Lyon        4    10   „   Columb’d   15,059  3,256    „     Pelouze.

 Lincoln     3     8   „       „       9,240  3,045    „     Pelouze.

 Burnside    1    13   „   Mortar.    17,120  2,760 Sergeant Wilson.

 Sherman     3    13   „       „      17,120  2,677 Captain  Francis.

 Halleck     2    13   „       „      17,120  2,407    „     Sanford.

 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 Scott       2    10   „   Columb’d   15,059  1,777    „     Mason.
     „       1     8   „       „       9,240           „          „
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 Sigel       5    30 lbs.  Part’s                      „     Seldenkirk.
                           s.c’r
     „       1    24   „   James                       „          „
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 McClellan   2    42   „       „                       „     Rogers.
     „       3    32   „       „                       „          „
 ───────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
 Totten      4    10 inch. Mortar.     1,852  1,643    „     Rodman.

These works were erected wholly at night, as they were all within range
of Fort Pulaski. Their faces were bomb-proof, while in the rear of those
most exposed lay a long wide swamp, into which it was supposed that a
great portion of the shot and shells from Fort Pulaski would fall. The
supposition proved correct. The magazines were bomb-proof, and trenches
connected the batteries on Goat’s Point; besides this, splinter-proofs
were provided for the reliefs, so that every protection possible was
secured to the men. The result proved with how great success these
preparations were made; during the bombardment of thirty hours the
gunners lost but one man killed or wounded. The work occupied six weeks,
and was chiefly performed by the Seventh Connecticut, Colonel Terry, the
Forty-fifth New York, Colonel Ross, and a detachment of Volunteer
Engineers, under Lieutenant-Colonel Hall. When the guns were nearly all
in position, a battalion of the Third Rhode Island Volunteer Artillery
was sent to Tybee to assist in manning the guns, and later the Eighth
Maine regiment, Colonel Rust.

The mounting of ordnance was executed under the direction of Lieutenant
Porter, of the U. S. army; he also assumed the entire charge of all
duties connected with the ordnance department on the island, supervised
the landing of ammunition and implements, and directed the
transportation of all the guns. This was a task of infinite labor. The
transportation of heavy guns, always difficult, was here rendered
peculiarly so. They had to be landed through a bad surf on an open
beach, and thence dragged by the soldiers for nearly two miles through a
yielding sand. The works were placed so as to be hidden from the enemy
until they opened fire. Battery Totten was nearly 1,700 yards from the
fort; Batteries Sigel and McClellan 1,620; Battery Scott nearly 1,677;
Battery Halleck 2,400; Battery Burnside and others were all more than
3,000; Battery Grant 3,500 yards away. Breaching casemated forts at this
distance had never been supposed practicable in modern warfare; indeed,
800 yards is the greatest distance at which it was ever attempted.

On the 9th of April the batteries were completed, the guns placed, and
the magazines filled. General Viele had constructed a co-operating
battery on the southern extremity of Long Island, in the Savannah, and
not more than two miles, if so far, from the fort. The purpose of this
was to obtain a reverse fire during the bombardment, which otherwise
would proceed entirely from Tybee Island. This battery was not completed
in time to engage in the first day’s action, but opened fire on the
second.

A day or two before the bombardment actually commenced, General Hunter
(who had superseded General Sherman in command of the land forces at
Hilton Head) and his aids, and General Benham with his staff, came down
on steamers from Hilton Head to be present during the engagement, though
the command was left with General Gillmore.

On the 9th of April General Gillmore issued orders when the bombardment
should be opened, and the part which each of the batteries should take
in the work. General Hunter sent a letter to Colonel Charles H.
Olmstead, First Regiment Georgia Volunteers, demanding an unconditional
surrender of the fort to the United States; and representing the loss of
life which would occur if resistance were made to the numerous batteries
with which he was surrounded. Colonel Olmstead replied briefly, saying
in language worthy of a more sacred cause, “I am here to defend the
fort, not to surrender it.” When Lieutenant J. H. Wilson returned with
this reply, orders were given to open fire from the batteries, and at
half-past seven A. M., the first shot was fired from Battery Halleck.
The other batteries followed, and Fort Pulaski promptly responded.

The guns for some time not obtaining the proper range, were ineffective.
The Federal gunners after a little time learned to distinguish the
various shot fired by the enemy, and the range they had. When a gun was
fired, and the shot was seen approaching, the cry of “casemate” or
“barbette” was given, and they sheltered themselves accordingly. Still
later in the engagement they distinguished the shot by the cry
“barbette” and “rifle,” and when the latter was fired they protected
themselves under cover, as far as possible. The same skill was attained
by the rebels in the fort.

The bombardment had continued several hours, when two mortar batteries
along the shore outside of the fort, on Goat’s Point, opened, and to
them the enemy directed his hottest fire.

About one o’clock the halyards attached to the flagstaff were shot away,
and the flag came down, but was immediately raised in a less conspicuous
place. During the afternoon an embrasure in the _pancoupe_, on the
south-east angle of the fort, was struck repeatedly, and pieces of the
brick work gave way. This angle was the nearest point to the batteries,
and in a direct line with the magazine of Fort Pulaski—a fact well known
to the Federals from plans of the work in their possession. Afterwards
all efforts to effect a breach were directed to this spot. Several of
the most important guns, however, were out of order; the mortar shells
were observed to fall mostly wide of the mark; and no great result could
be noticed even when one fell within the fort. Numerous marks, however,
all along both faces of the work which were exposed, told the force and
accuracy of the firing. By nightfall, the breach was so far effected
that it was evident it could eventually be converted into a practicable
one. The bombardment was discontinued at dark, three mortar batteries
firing one shell each at intervals of five minutes all night long,
worrying the enemy, and preventing any attempt to stop the breach, but
without any idea of doing material harm. Several of his guns had
evidently been dismounted, and others silenced, during the day. The
breach had been commenced, but on the whole the result did not seem
especially encouraging. The men and officers were very thoroughly tired
with the severe work they had undergone, and the still more fatiguing
excitement; few had found time to eat or drink. Many, however, had night
duties to perform. Strong infantry pickets were placed, and still
stronger supports, in expectation an attempt would be made to relieve
the garrison.

Shortly after daybreak all the batteries were opened again. The reply
was more vigorous than on the day before. On the Federal side every gun
was in readiness, and did good service. The great columbiads under
Captain Pelouze were especially effective; they certainly shook the
walls of old Pulaski, and damaged them to a considerable extent. All
along the line the firing was more rapid and more accurate, five shots
striking the walls within as many seconds. Rebel officers said that, on
an average, one out of three shots that were fired took effect, and that
during all of the second day one shot or shell every minute was the
average they received. Early in the morning Captain Seldenkirk, of
Battery Sigel, was relieved, and Captain C. P. R. Rodgers, of the
frigate Wabash, with a portion of her crew, worked several of the guns
of this battery during the remainder of the fight. At the same time
Captain Turner, Chief of Commissary on General Hunter’s staff, and
Lieutenant Wilson, undertook to drill a detachment of the Eighth Maine
Volunteers (Colonel Rust). These men went to work, were drilled under
fire, and in ten minutes were able to serve their guns with more than
tolerable accuracy, and did some of the most effective service rendered
that day. This same regiment lay not more than half a mile in the rear
of Battery Halleck, for more than half of the entire engagement, covered
only by some brushwood, but perfectly content with their exposed
position.

Early on the second day, especial attention was directed to the breach.
Every gun that could be brought to bear upon the _pancoupe_ was trained
that way, and directly the aperture began to show the effects. In an
hour it became large enough for two men to enter abreast, and the
nearest embrasure on its left was also considerably enlarged. Meanwhile,
all the other effects of the day before were enhanced; shots struck all
over the two exposed faces of the fort; the mortar batteries on the
shore of Cockspur Island were silenced, and several of the casemate guns
were struck through the embrasures. The battery put up by General Viele,
on Long Island, opened fire that morning, and received repeated replies,
rendering good service by the destruction it occasioned. The gunboat
Norwich, laying on the right of the fort, also became engaged—the
distance, however, was too great for her to render any special
assistance,—still she got an occasional answer from the garrison. On
this day clouds of red dust were seen to rise more frequently from the
fort, indicating that the brickwork of which it is constructed was
breaking up, and after a while, the great breach became so large that
the propriety of a storming party was discussed. The lower part of the
aperture was partly filled by the _debris_ that fell from above; the
arch of the casemate was laid bare, while evidently shaken, a gun in
barbette, immediately over the breach, was tottering and ready to tumble
below. The breach by its side was also momentarily becoming wider, and
just as General Benham was questioning whether a messenger should not be
sent to demand a surrender, before risking so great a loss of human life
as must be incurred in an assault, the rebel flag on old Pulaski was
lowered half way, and a final shot fired from a casemate in the fort. As
the flag was not completely hauled down, the Unionists were for a moment
uncertain of its import, but all firing was ordered to cease. In a
minute more the white flag was raised, and with cheer after cheer all
along the batteries on Tybee, came down the stars and bars. It was on
the 11th of April, a year to a day from the time when the stars and
stripes were first dishonored by Americans at Fort Sumter.

General Hunter was aboard the McClellan with his aides, watching the
engagement. Generals Gillmore and Benham were active, and rode rapidly
out to Goat’s Point. On arriving at this place, General Gillmore, with
his aid, Mr. Badeau, and Colonel Rust, entered a boat and put off for
the fort. The passage was rough, the channel unknown, and the skiff got
aground, and was nearly upset; but at last, soaked and dripping, the
party landed on Cockspur Island.

They were met near the landing-place by Captain Sims, of the Georgia
Volunteers, who conducted them to the fort. Colonel Olmstead, the
commandant, stood at the entrance, and received them courteously. He
invited General Gillmore into his own quarters, for a private interview.
The terms of capitulation were arranged, and General Gillmore was then
conducted over the fort by the Colonel, and took his leave, accompanied
by Colonel Rust. General Hunter, in the mean time, had sent messengers
to the fort. Colonel Olmstead showed them around the works, and
conducted them to the interior, when the swords were delivered. This
took place in the Colonel’s headquarters, all standing. Major Halpine
represented General Hunter. As soon as this ceremony was over, the
American flag was raised, and the stars and stripes floated again on the
walls of Fort Pulaski. In giving up his sword, Colonel Olmstead said, “I
yield my sword, but I trust I have not disgraced it.”

The arms of the privates had been previously stacked on the parade, and
the men marched to quarters. Both officers and men were allowed to
remain all night in their usual quarters. The interior of the fort
presented a sorry picture. Blindages had been put up extending on all
the rampart, and a part rendered bomb-proof; but shot and shell had
burst through many of the sides—knocked in walls, broken down stairways,
entered casemates, upset guns, and piled up masses of rubbish and
_debris_ all around. Seven guns on the parapet were dismounted; nearly
every traverse had been struck and partly torn to pieces; all the
passageways were obstructed by piles of stones and fallen timber; the
magazine had been struck, and part of its outer casing of brick torn
away, while at the breach, the havoc was, of course, greatest of all.
The breach was entirely practicable; the ditch, sixty feet across, was
more than half filled up by the fragments that had fallen, and half a
dozen men abreast could have entered the aperture. The Colonel declared,
however, that he should have held out until nightfall, had the magazine
not been struck. This, of course, settled his fate, and rendered any
prolonged resistance a useless risk of human life. Forty thousand pounds
of powder, seven thousand shot and shell, and forty-seven guns were
captured. The prisoners were three hundred and sixty in number, and
belonged to the Georgia Volunteers, the Oglethorpe Light Infantry, and
to a German regiment. The Colonel excited the sympathies of his captors
by a bearing at once soldierly and subdued. The officers invited the
Unionists to their quarters, where several took supper, and some even
slept with the rebels whom they had been fighting a few hours before.
There was no apparent bitterness on either side; no desire to introduce
personal animosities.

This long and severely contested siege resulted in the loss of only two
lives, while the number of wounded was very small. This fact is
remarkable, in view of the immense amount of shot and shell exchanged
during the bombardment.

On Sunday, the 13th, the men were divided into two parties—the officers
and about two-thirds of the men forming the first, who were placed on
the Ben de Ford—the remainder on the Honduras, and taken to Bay Point.
Here they were transferred to the McClellan and Star of the South, to be
sent to Fort Columbus, in the harbor of New York.




                  BATTLE OF SOUTH MILLS, CAMDEN, N. C.

                            APRIL 20, 1862.


A short but severely contested engagement took place on the 20th of
April, between the command of General J. L. Reno, and a body of rebels
posted in a strong position to intercept the supposed advance of the
Federal troops on Norfolk. General Burnside directed General Reno to
make a demonstration on that city, and the latter, taking with him from
Newbern the Twenty-first Massachusetts and Fifty-first Pennsylvania,
proceeded to Roanoke, where he was joined by detachments of the
Eighty-ninth New York and Sixth New Hampshire. With these forces he
started for Elizabeth City, and commenced disembarking at midnight, on
the 19th, at a point about three miles below the city, on the east side.

By three A. M. Colonel Hawkins’ brigade, consisting of the Ninth and
Eighty-ninth New York, and Sixth New Hampshire, were landed and ready to
move. Colonel Hawkins proceeded with his brigade toward South Mills.
General Reno remained to bring up the other two regiments, which had
been delayed by the grounding of their vessels at the mouth of the
river. They came up at daylight, and were landed by seven A. M. General
Reno marched directly toward South Mills, and about twelve miles out met
Colonel Hawkins, with his brigade, who, either by the treachery or
incompetency of his guide, had been led some miles out of his way. As
his men were very much jaded by the long march, they were ordered to
follow the Second brigade, about four miles further, to within a mile
and a half of South Mills.

The rebels were posted here, and opened a fire of artillery, before the
advanced guard discovered them. General Reno reconnoitered their
position, and found that they were posted strongly in a line
perpendicular to the road, their infantry in ditches, their artillery
commanding all the direct approaches, and their rear protected by a
dense forest. He ordered the Fifty-first Pennsylvania immediately to
file to the right, and pass over to the edge of the woods, to turn their
left—the Twenty-first Massachusetts pursuing the same course; and when
Colonel Hawkins came up with his brigade, he was sent with the Ninth and
Eighty-ninth New York to their support.

The Sixth New Hampshire was formed in line to the left of the road, and
its commander ordered to support the four pieces of artillery. Owing to
the excessive fatigue of the men, they met with some delay in reaching
their position. Meanwhile the enemy kept up a brisk artillery fire,
which was gallantly responded to by the small pieces under charge of
Colonel Howard, of the Coast Guard. As soon as the Fifty-first
Pennsylvania and Twenty-first Massachusetts had succeeded in turning
their left, they opened a brisk musketry fire, and, about the same time,
the Ninth New York, also coming in range, eager to engage, unfortunately
charged upon the enemy’s artillery. It was a most gallant charge, but
they were exposed to a deadly fire of grape and musketry, and forced to
retire, but rallied immediately upon the Eighty-ninth New York. General
Reno then ordered both regiments to form a junction with the
Twenty-first Massachusetts. In the meantime, the Fifty-first
Pennsylvania and Twenty-first Massachusetts kept up an incessant fire
upon the rebels, who had withdrawn their artillery, and commenced to
retreat in good order. The Sixth New Hampshire had steadily advanced in
line to the left of the road, and when within about two hundred yards
poured in a deadly volley, which completely demoralized the enemy and
ended the battle.

The men rested under arms in line of battle, until about ten o’clock, P.
M., when they were ordered to return to the boats, having accomplished
the principal object of the expedition, that of conveying the idea that
the entire Burnside Expedition was marching upon Norfolk. Owing to a
want of transportation, sixteen of the most severely wounded were left
behind. Assistant-Surgeon Warren was left with them. Only about ten or
fifteen prisoners were taken. Most of them belonged to the Third Georgia
regiment. The Ninth New York suffered most severely, owing to their
premature charge. The total loss of the Federal troops in killed and
wounded was about ninety, some sixty of the number belonging to that
regiment.

Just as the decisive volley of the Sixth New Hampshire had compelled the
rebels to abandon their position, a terrific thunder storm broke upon
the scene of conflict, and a heavy rain rendered the hope of pursuit
futile. After burying the dead, and taking a brief rest, General Reno
and his command took up their march for headquarters, at Newbern. On the
advance the sun beat fiercely upon his exhausted men, the weather was
intensely hot, and they were almost prostrated with the fatigue of the
battle and the labor of the march, before they reached a place of rest.




                      CAPTURE OF FORT MACON, N. C.

                            APRIL 26, 1862.


The occupation of the town of Beaufort and Morehead City by the Federal
troops, on the 24th of March, was followed by active preparations for
the reduction of Fort Macon, which commanded the entrance to the harbor.
It was anticipated that on the retreat of the rebel troops from Beaufort
the overwhelming numbers and equipment of the national forces would
demonstrate to the commander of the fort the hopelessness of any attempt
to resist the armament that would be brought against him in the event of
his refusal to surrender. This hope was not realized. Colonel M. J.
White, the commander, resolved to meet the Union forces with every
possible resistance, and if the fort was captured by the Federal arms,
the doughty rebel determined that it should be purchased at no slight
cost.

Fort Macon is situated on a bluff on Bogue’s Bank, nearly two miles from
the town of Beaufort. It commands the entrance to the harbor, and no
vessel can enter the main channel without coming within range of its
guns. Opposite the fort, at the entrance of the harbor, is Shackelford
Banks, distant about one mile and a half. Fort Macon is of a hexagonal
form, and has two tiers of guns—one in casemated bomb-proof, and the
other _en barbette_. Its armament consisted of twenty 32-pounders,
thirty 24-pounders, two 18-pounders, three field pieces for flank
defence, twelve flank howitzers, eight 8-inch howitzers (heavy), eight
8-inch howitzers (light), one 13-inch mortar, three 10-inch mortars, and
two Cohorn mortars—total, 89 guns. The war garrison of the fort was 300
men. There are large furnaces in the fort for heating shot, and before
the investment there was a considerable quantity of powder in the
magazine. The construction of Fort Macon was commenced in 1826, by
Captain Eliason, of the United States Engineer Corps, and was finished
in 1860, by Captain, afterwards Brigadier-General John G. Foster.

This fort, like most others in the Southern States, at the opening of
the rebellion, was in an almost defenceless condition. Ordnance Sergeant
Alexander was the sole guardian of this important position in April,
1861.

In March, the vote on the question of calling a State Convention was
taken in North Carolina, and a majority was given against the
Convention. Governor Ellis assured the officer in command that the fort
would not be taken from under the control of the government, but on the
11th of April, a citizen of Beaufort, in the interest of the
secessionists, collected a body of fifty men, with whom he crossed over
to the fort and demanded its surrender. Sergeant Alexander delivered up
the keys, and the rebel flag was hoisted on its walls. Subsequently
stores and supplies for a garrison of 500 men were collected and placed
within it, and an efficient body of troops took possession, under
Colonel White.

On March 25th, 1862, Morehead City, on the mainland, opposite Bogue
Island, was occupied by a portion of General Parke’s division of
Burnside’s army. A few days subsequently a landing had been effected on
Bogue Island, and a camp established for the force selected to operate
against Fort Macon. On the 11th of April the enemy’s pickets were driven
in by the Fifth Rhode Island regiment and one company of the Fourth
Rhode Island, and eligible localities for the batteries were selected by
Captain Williamson, Topographical Engineer on General Burnside’s staff.
On the next day a working party commenced the erection of the main
battery, and from that time the labor proceeded night and day. The
troops employed in this service were the Fourth and Fifth Rhode Island
and the Eighth Connecticut regiments. The labor was most severe. The men
were often on duty twenty-four hours at a time, and labored zealously to
accomplish their task in the shortest possible period. What rest they
got when on duty was obtained by sleeping on the sands, as no tents or
barracks could be erected, since these would have informed the rebels of
the location of the troops, and indicated the position of the batteries.
The picket duty performed by the men was also very severe. All their
work had to be done under a continuous and often severe fire from the
fort. From this, however, they were protected by the peculiar formation
of the ground, which consisted of a succession of sand-hills up to
within about half a mile of the fort.

Previous to the bombardment the garrison were allowed to send letters to
their friends at Beaufort.

Three batteries were erected for the reduction of the fort. The first
was mounted with four ten-inch mortars, and was built under cover of a
large sand-hill, near the edge of the marshes which line the northern
shore of the island, at a distance of about 1,400 yards from the fort.
This battery was allotted to Lieutenant Flagler, and manned by a portion
of battery I, New York Third artillery. The second was in advance 100
yards, built and worked by Captain Lewis O. Morris, and Lieutenants
Gowan and Pollock. Three long thirty-pound siege Parrott guns, rifled,
composed its armament. The last battery consisted of four eight-inch
mortars. It stood 100 yards in advance of the second battery, and was
placed in charge of Lieutenant Prouty, and manned by a detachment of
battery I, Third New York artillery. Rifle-pits and trenches were also
excavated.

On the 24th of April, the preparations having been completed, General
Burnside arrived from Newbern, on the steamer Alice Price, having in tow
two barges, the Schrapnel and Grenade, fitted up as floating batteries,
each armed with two thirty-pound Parrott guns. The Schrapnel had in
addition a twelve-pounder rifled Ward gun. They anchored about three
miles below the fort.

During the afternoon a flag of truce was sent to the fort, in charge of
Captain Biggs, of General Burnside’s staff, with a demand for its
surrender. Colonel White refused to yield to the demand, and announced
his purpose to defend the fort to the last extremity. An understanding
was obtained, however, that the commander should have a personal
interview with General Burnside on the following morning.

Accordingly, at an early hour on the 25th, the steamer Alice Price,
under a flag of truce, proceeded down the bay to a point previously
indicated, where General Burnside was soon joined by Colonel White. The
meeting was courteous. Colonel White said that he had been placed in
command of the fort for the purpose of holding it, and should defend it
to the best of his ability.

On the following morning, the 26th, the Federal forces took their
respective posts at an early hour. The morning mists had not yet
disappeared, when orders were given for the opening of the siege, and
before six o’clock the loud thunder of the guns and the deep boom of the
heavy mortars broke on the ears of the sleeping citizens of Beaufort,
and roused the slumbering garrison of the belligerent fort. Booming
loudly over the waters, and rolling away in the distance, the explosions
followed in rapid succession for half an hour before the garrison was
ready to respond. When prepared, the rebels bravely assumed their
allotted positions, manned their guns, and Fort Macon opened upon the
national flag.

During the forenoon the eight-inch mortar battery of Lieutenant Prouty
sent its shells with regularity and precision into the fort, and at each
explosion the red dirt and sand of the glacis’ slopes, ramparts,
parapets and terrepleins were dashed in a cloud many feet into the air.
The flagstaff, with its defiant colors floating at the top, was at times
completely obscured in the smoke and dust which rose with the bursting
of the missiles. The ten-inch mortar battery was not so successful in
the morning. The shells from it burst beyond or high in air over the
fort, scattering the fragments of iron far and wide into the water; but
in the afternoon the battery played with an effect that was evidenced in
the decreased fire from the fort.

The battery of Parrott guns under command of Captain Morris, in the mean
time, kept up an incessant fire upon the ramparts. The difficulty of
obtaining accurate range was for some time experienced, and the shots
either went over the fort, ricocheting across the water towards
Shackleford Banks, or fell short and buried themselves in the sand and
glacis on its westerly side. But the range grew more accurate with every
shot, and from twelve o’clock until the close of the fight Captain
Morris seldom failed to plant his terrible conical balls among the guns,
on the edges of the ramparts, and against the walls. The latter were
pierced in two places, the balls passing through into the casemates,
from which their unceremonious visit hastily expelled the occupants.
Wherever these shots struck they tore through all obstacles with a force
that hurled fragments of iron and brick, stones, grass-sods and sand
bags about in every direction. Many of the rebels were knocked down
senseless by the flying sods. When it is considered that the walls of
the fort were protected by the slopes of the glacis, the accuracy of the
firing from the Parrott battery will be perceived. That part of the
walls just protruding above the ramparts of the glacis was the only
target presented whereat to aim for the purpose of penetrating the
casemates.

About two o’clock, P. M., Major Allen went out with a flag of truce to
carry letters written to the garrison from their friends in Beaufort.
Many of these entreated the officers to prevail upon Colonel White to
surrender the fort. Some ladies in Beaufort set on foot a petition to
that effect.

The precision attained by the practice of the forenoon, and the facility
of loading and firing, which even the experience of a few hours had
given, were now evidenced in the successful results of each shot from
the Union batteries. The scene assumed its grandest aspect after two
o’clock. A flash and a puff of smoke betokened a discharge; an interval
elapsed, which terminated with the report of the piece; then came the
sonorous hum of the shell as it flew through the air; another puff of
smoke soon followed by a second report, and the deadly missile had
exploded.

With glasses every manœuvre in the fort could be distinctly seen. The
look out was ensconced behind a pile of sand bags upon the ramparts, and
spectators fancied they could hear him ejaculate the word “Down!” as he
marked the approach of every shot. Its effect was like magic. As he
himself disappeared, down out of sight went the crowd of men around the
guns, to reappear again when the shot had accomplished its errand.

Little remains to tell of the bombardment. The garrison had at first
responded with some seven or eight guns, exclusive of carronades, which
were made to serve the purpose of mortars. The squads of gunners could
be observed passing about, alternating with the pieces as they became
hot under the discharges. Gradually the fire slackened to four, then to
three, and then to two guns. The Federal shot and shell were doing their
duty, and subsequent examination showed that fifteen guns were
dismounted or disabled on the fort.

To those who worked the mortars of the Federal batteries, the matter was
entirely new, and to Captain Ammon’s men, of the Third New York
artillery, the greatest praise is deserved for their cool and
unflinching conduct in this their first experience under fire. The
exposed nature of Captain Morris’ battery of siege guns drew upon it
almost the concentrated fire of the fort, and shot and shell rained
around it. The only injury sustained by the battery was the temporary
dismounting of one of the guns by a thirty-two-pound solid shot, which
came through the embrasure and carried off a wheel. Another carriage was
in readiness, and the gun was soon remounted. One of the guns was
slightly dented by a solid shot, which struck the reinforce or band
around the breech, and then glanced off. The sand bags in all the
batteries were disturbed more or less by the concussions, and the
embrasures of the three-gun battery were begrimed and black with powder.
Eleven hundred shots in all were fired on the Federal side, and of these
five hundred and sixty struck the fort.

The firing from the fort gradually slackened as the guns one after
another became disabled, until at last the iron thunderers ceased to
respond to the continuous peals of the Federal batteries. About
half-past four o’clock a white flag was run up over one of the guns,
dimly seen through the smoke that had just before issued from it in a
heavy cloud. Not long after two officers left the fort, bearing a flag
of truce. They advanced towards the batteries, and Captain Pell, of
General Burnside’s staff, and Lieutenant Hill, of General Parke’s staff
went out to meet them. They were Captains Pool and Guion, with a message
from Col. White, asking the terms of surrender. General Parke replied
that the only terms were unconditional surrender, but that he would
communicate with General Burnside, who might make different
arrangements. The inquiry was telegraphed to Beaufort, and a messenger
was sent off to General Burnside, who was on board the Alice Price, some
distance up the river. In the morning General Burnside returned to the
harbor, and had an interview with Colonel White, on board the Alice
Price, when the terms of capitulation were agreed upon. The fort,
armament and garrison were to be surrendered to the United States, the
officers and men being released on parole, until properly exchanged,
returning to their homes with their private effects, such as clothing,
bedding, books, etc.

Immediately after the return of Colonel White to his quarters,
preparations for the surrender commenced. After a little interval the
gates were thrown open and a train of soldiers marched out, and forming
a square on the green, just outside, stood a few moments in impressive
stillness. Then they formed into line, where they stacked their arms,
and returned to their quarters.

General Burnside, General Parke, and Captains Biggs and King directly
after this ceremony, returned from the fort, and the Fifth Rhode Island
being ordered into line, came up. General Burnside unfolded the new
colors presented by the State of Rhode Island, inscribed with the words
“Roanoke” and “Newbern,” which had been just received, and returned them
to the color-bearer, who took his place at the head of the column. The
regiment then moved forward in order, to take formal possession of the
fort.

The time had at last come for the great event. The wharves and houses of
Beaufort were crowded with spectators. The surrounding waters were
covered with small craft, hovering near the scene. The squadron of
gunboats, with steam up and colors flying, lay off and on outside the
bar. At half-past ten o’clock a squad of men from the garrison, detailed
by Colonel White for the purpose, cut loose the halliards and hauled
down the rebel flag. Ten minutes later four of the Rhode Island boys
hoisted the American ensign, the glorious stars and stripes, and a loud
cheer broke from the men, which was caught up and echoed by the sailors
on shipboard, and even by the citizens over the harbor, in Beaufort,
whose shout came cheerily on the breeze.

The Federal fleet, consisting of the steamers State of Georgia,
Chippewa, Daylight, and bark Gemsbok, under command of Flag-officer S.
Lockwood, took an active part in the bombardment in the forenoon.

The destruction effected by the bombardment was like that at Fort
Pulaski. The works outside as well as inside, gave incontestible proof
of the execution of the heavy projectiles hurled at the fort. They also
showed as clearly the bravery of the men who defended it, and proved
that though they were engaged in rebellion, they had the courage and
energy of heroic soldiers.

The garrison consisted of about four hundred and fifty men, exclusive of
the officers. There were found in the fort nearly twenty thousand pounds
of powder, shot and shell in proportion, and a large quantity of
provisions.

The rebel loss was 7 killed, 18 wounded; Federal, 1 killed and 3
wounded.

[Illustration: [Map]]

[Illustration: [Map]]




                         SIEGE OF YORKTOWN, VA.


On Sunday, the 9th of March, the rebel camps at Centreville, Manassas
and vicinity were evacuated, and on the 10th, the army of General
McClellan commenced a forward movement from the vicinity of Washington
toward the abandoned works of the enemy. On the same day a portion of
General Kearney’s forces reached Centreville, and Federal scouts had
explored the deserted works at Manassas Junction. The enemy continued
their retreat on the line of the Orange railroad, burning the bridges,
and destroying the railroad property on their route.

On the 14th, General McClellan issued an address to the army from his
headquarters at Fairfax Court-House, complimenting the men on their
discipline, equipment, and patience during the long delay incident to
the work of preparation. They were now to be brought face to face with
the enemy, and he besought the army to place perfect trust in him,
though his plans of action might seem at times unaccountable.

The cheering news of the capture of New Madrid, the evacuation of
Columbus, and the victory at Pea Ridge, now filled all loyal hearts with
enthusiasm; and it was fully believed that the army of the Potomac was
on the direct route to Richmond, destined to give the death-blow to the
rebellion before the month of April should open. Will the rebels make a
stand? asked many a confident Unionist, hopeful that the prestige of
McClellan’s splendid army would compel the enemy to retire from point to
point without risking a battle.

The month of March passed;—and while the public mind was animated with
the most cheering details of the western victories—the capture of
Newbern, and the defeat of the enemy at Winchester, the great army of
the Potomac appeared for the time to have passed from recollection. The
Government censorship restrained the publication of any reports of
McClellan’s movements, and the people, left entirely to hope and
conjecture, were sanguine in anticipation of the speedy possession of
the Confederate capital.

Late in the month, rumors reached the northern cities of the arrival of
forces at Old Point, on the James river, twenty miles from Norfolk,
which were supposed by the Richmond papers to be reinforcements for
Burnside. Again curiosity was awakened by the immense number of
transports called for and chartered by the Government, daily arriving at
the mouth of the Chesapeake. On the 26th, Great Bethel was taken
possession of by the Federal troops, and on the 29th a reconnoissance in
force was made toward Yorktown. It was now generally known that the
large army under General McClellan had been conveyed by transports to
Old Point, and was marching to attack the rebel entrenchments at
Yorktown, the key of the Peninsula.

On the 5th of April, General McClellan’s dispatch to the Secretary of
War, announced that his army had that day arrived in front of the
enemy’s works, having met with but slight opposition on its route.

During this period the weather was unfavorable for military operations.
Heavy storm-clouds frowned inauspiciously on the approaching army, rain
fell almost daily in torrents, and this at a time when there could be no
adequate provision for shelter.

The Federal army was now destined to undergo an experience of toil and
privations calculated to try its endurance to the utmost.

Solid roads were absolutely necessary for transportation from the
landings to the various encampments, as it was impossible to draw the
immense siege and supply trains over or through the soft alluvial mire
formed by the unremitting rains, while the creeks and water courses were
swollen into torrents. Skirmishing was of daily occurrence—for the enemy
neglected no opportunity to annoy their formidable opponents, while the
Federal army found it necessary to push its advances within commanding
reach of the rebel entrenchments, which stretched from the York to the
James rivers, a distance of six miles. The rebel earthworks were
ponderously built—some of them of a height and thickness hitherto
unparalleled in any war.

The Union soldiery toiled incessantly in the trenches, while covering
parties, with efficient batteries, stood guard in their defence, and
daily sacrificed some of their brave numbers while protecting their
toiling comrades.

The labors of the Federal army soon became apparent. Formidable
earthworks began to show their heads, and artillery of the largest
calibre was put in position. The rebel generals were struck with
astonishment and dismay when the evidences of engineering skill hitherto
unsuspected, stood revealed before them.

On the other hand, every day more fully revealed the extensive and
intricate line of the rebel defences. Their strength in forts, lunettes
and rifle-pits—their constantly increasing numbers, and untiring
activity, with their accurate knowledge of the topography of the
country, increased the magnitude of the work before the Federal army.
The natural obstacles to its progress were by no means few or trifling.
The sinuous windings of the line of attack they were obliged to
assume—the innumerable swamps and pools of water confronting them on
every side, the almost impenetrable forests and tangled undergrowth
added to their labors and their sufferings. Cold and shivering under
garments saturated anew by the rains of to-day, ere those of yesterday
had been vaporized, the soldiers endured the pangs of hunger and fatigue
unappalled. In view of the terrific struggle before them, human
suffering counted for nothing with these brave men. No signs of
discontent were manifest. Even in their hardest trials the utmost
cheerfulness prevailed; and in more remote positions, where a less rigid
discipline was enforced, the patriotic strains of “The Star Spangled
Banner” and the “Red, White and Blue,” were heard ringing up through the
storm. Not unfrequently, with faces turned toward the patriot homes from
whence they came, would they sing “Do they Miss me at Home?” or “Let me
Kiss him for his Mother”—while they breathed the silent prayer that,
through the uncertainties of war, they might be permitted again to
mingle with their friends in the enjoyment of a bravely won peace.

Daily would some adventurous band of Federal soldiers explore the
intricacies of the rebel defences, coming constantly in collision with
the enemy. In these adventures the new and efficient regiments of
sharpshooters, just introduced into the United States army, rendered
valuable service.

A month before the Union army invested Yorktown, the iron battery
Merrimac had made her advent in Hampton Roads, and after destroying the
noble old frigates Cumberland and Congress—the pride of a past era—she
met the Monitor, her conqueror and the nation’s champion. The combat
that ensued has stamped a glorious page on the world’s history for all
time. Like Lucifer in his fall, the rebel monster shrank with
“despairing, cursing rage” behind the batteries at Yorktown, while the
terrors of her exploits, and rejoicings at her defeat, quickened the
nation’s heart-pulses from Maine to Maryland.

The noble Minnesota, resting in calm and majestic repose on the waters
of the Chesapeake, hitherto would have acknowledged no superior in a
naval combat. An exposure for two hours to the heavy guns of the
Merrimac, which pierced her wooden walls with shot and shell, while her
own missiles were ineffective as pebbles on the scales of the leviathan,
destroyed her prestige and her pride of strength.

An efficient fleet of gunboats had been ordered to act in conjunction
with McClellan’s forces in the reduction of Yorktown; but the presence
of the Merrimac no doubt frustrated their plans. On the 15th of April
several of the gunboats commenced shelling the woods below Gloucester.
One boat approaching within two miles of Yorktown, brought her guns to
bear on that place, until driven off by the rebel batteries.

About the same time a portion of the Potomac flotilla ascended the
Rappahannock, meeting with but slight opposition, visiting the towns of
Urbana and Tappahannock, and destroying the enemy’s batteries and huts
at Lowry’s Point.




                       BATTLE OF LEE’S MILLS, VA.

                            APRIL 16, 1862.


The defence of Yorktown prompted the rebel chiefs to project a line of
batteries and earthworks across the peninsula which has been rendered so
prominent in historic interest by the series of important events that
have occurred between Richmond and Fortress Monroe. In the course of
completing this line, a battery was commenced at a point on the Warwick
road, on the estate of Mrs. Garrow, between Lee’s Mills and Winn’s
Mills. There is here an extensive field, with woods to the right and
left, and in the rear of the road. In front, at the foot of a gradually
descending slope, is a branch of the Warwick river. The stream had been
dammed up between these mills, the water covering a breadth of from
thirty to forty rods, and in the deepest parts about four and a half
feet deep. On the bank was a rifle-pit, and above it, on the hill,
breastworks, with their embrasures for guns, frowned upon the water.

The arrest of this work, and the expulsion of the rebels, became
necessary, in order to prevent the completion of what might have become
a formidable obstacle. Accordingly, on the morning of the 16th, a party
of skirmishers from the Fourth Vermont was thrown out, and took a
position near the enemy’s one gun battery, at the point named, a New
York battery being also advanced at the same time. Opposite the enemy’s
works at that place there was a considerable space clear of large wood,
overgrown with low shrubs and young pine, and surrounded in every
direction except towards the enemy by a dense forest. Warwick Creek—from
four to five feet deep and about twenty rods wide—separated this field
from the rebel battery. Through the low shrubs and young pine the
Vermonters made their way up to the edge of the stream, and poured upon
the enemy a storm of rifle shot that he soon found it impossible to
withstand. After a few moments of this fire not a man was to be seen
within the enemy’s lines.

Two pieces of the battery—ten-pound Parrots, under Lieutenant Flynn—then
took up a position in the edge of the wood, at one thousand yards from
the enemy’s line, and opened fire. Then the enemy came bravely up to the
business, and responded with the large gun in his one gun battery, and
with two others in a battery behind it. Lieutenant Stewart, with the
second section of the same battery—two twelve-pound Napoleon guns—was
ordered up, with the left section, under Lieutenant O’Donald. With this
reinforcement the fire became heavy between the artillery on both sides;
the Union skirmishers and numbers of the enemy’s skirmishers also
pouring in their fire whenever they saw an opportunity.

At about ten A. M., after nearly two hours’ sharp firing, the enemy
ceased to respond, not, it was thought, because his guns had been
disabled, but because the Union riflemen held his position so entirely
under fire that it was almost certain death for his men to be seen.

It was now deemed necessary to ascertain the enemy’s force at this point
and his disposition to fight. Upon consultation between General
McClellan and two division commanders, it was determined to make a more
decided demonstration of attack, and, accordingly, between three and
four P. M., three batteries were ordered forward into the exposed field,
and opened fire at about five hundred yards. This woke the enemy up; he
responded warmly for twenty minutes, and once more relapsed into
silence. In no way deceived by this, the three batteries continued to
play upon his position for some minutes longer, when word was brought to
the General of the Vermont brigade that the creek was easily fordable,
at some distance to the right, and Colonel Hyde, in command of four
companies of the Vermont Third, who had skirmished in advance, was
ordered to send two of his companies across the creek at the point where
it was said to be only knee-deep, advance them to the enemy’s left, and
charge the work in rear. He accordingly sent across companies D and F,
and supported them very closely with companies E and K. Meanwhile the
Federal batteries became silent. No sooner were the Vermonters in the
stream than the water was found to be much deeper than had been stated;
the men went up to their arm-pits, and every charge of their ammunition,
was, of course, thoroughly soaked. This attempt was made below the dam,
and the enemy, when he saw their intention to cross, let in more water
upon them by a floodgate.

While the men were in the stream, a large body of the enemy, estimated
at three regiments, opened upon them from a rifle-pit on the bank, and
this terrible fire cut down nearly half their number. Never was a fire
received with greater steadiness or more glorious intrepidity. Except
the poor fellows who had been killed or wounded, not a man of the
magnificent Vermonters wavered, but all pushed on, and with one shout
leaped to the bank, rushed upon the enemy with their bayonets, and
fairly drove them in utter rout and confusion. But the contest was too
unequal. No supports were within proper distance; and though the enemy
was driven away from the first line of pits, and the other two companies
of the Third were in the water to cross, those on the other side were
ordered to retreat.

After the remnant of these companies returned, the Union batteries,
which had in the mean time ceased firing, opened in full force again.
Then the Sixth Vermont regiment was ordered to storm the work by the
left flank.

Led by their gallant Colonel Lord, they rushed into the water. Seven
companies had entered, and some had reached within three yards of the
breastwork, when they were met by the fire of a long line of rebel
rifles, which appeared above the parapets. A running fire from a
thousand small arms was poured upon the Union men, who stood three feet
deep in water. It was returned as gallantly as the circumstances would
warrant. The breastwork was lighted up with a continuous sheet of flame,
the artillery belched away at the enemy, shells were bursting over their
breastworks, the smoke of the battle was ascending, and for a few
moments the scene was one of appalling grandeur. Not a man flinched, and
the fire of the enemy was returned with deadly effect. Wherever a head
appeared above the parapet it became the mark for a hundred guns.
Finding that rebel reinforcements were still advancing, and despairing
of a successful assault with the bayonet, Colonel Lord retired with his
men, who brought most of their wounded comrades away with them.

The loss of the Federals in this engagement was between thirty and forty
killed, and one hundred and thirty-two wounded and missing. The object
of the demonstration was fully accomplished, the rebels being compelled
to relinquish their work, and abandon it as a defensive position. Their
loss was not ascertained, but it must have been very considerable, their
number being large, and the firing of the Federal gunners fatally
precise. Captain Wheeler reported that he fired 313 shots, 126 of which
were case shot, the remainder shell. Ayers’ and Kennedy’s batteries
threw about 450, and Captain Mott reported 954, making more than 1,700
shot and shell hurled upon the rebels. The behavior of the Federal
troops was excellent, and the event of the day successful, although the
object was dearly purchased.




                        CAPTURE OF NEW ORLEANS.


              BOMBARDMENT OF FORTS JACKSON AND ST. PHILIP.

                           APRIL 18–26, 1862.

The work of opening the Mississippi river, which had been so
magnificently commenced and prosecuted by that portion of the army and
fleet above Memphis, was destined to find an equally imposing, if not
more brilliant counterpart, in the naval operations near the city of New
Orleans, once more to open that important commercial point to the world,
and restore its citizens to the protection of the national flag. As an
important auxiliary to this grand enterprise, a fleet of mortar-boats
was fitted out in Brooklyn, N. Y., and other places, which formed a
rendezvous at Ship Island, awaiting orders. Commodore DAVID D. PORTER
was assigned to the command of the mortar fleet. The entire fleet, under
the command of Commodore D. G. Farragut, was composed as follows:

[Illustration:

  SECTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI RIVER.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES BELOW NEW ORLEANS.
]

_First Division of Ships_, Flag-officer D. G. FARRAGUT,
commanding—Hartford, R. Wainright; Brooklyn, Craven; Richmond, Alden.

_Second Division of Ships_—Pensacola, Morris; Portsmouth, Swartwout;
Mississippi, Smith.

_First Division of Gunboats_, Captain T. Bailey—Oneida, Lee; Varuna,
Boggs; Katahdin, Preble; Kineo, Ransom; Wissahickon, Smith; Cayuga,
Harrison.

_Second Division of Gunboats_, H. H. Bell—Iroquis, De Camp; Sciota,
Donaldson; Kennebeck, Russell; Pinola, Crosby; Itasca, Cauldwell;
Winona, Nichols. Total, 18.

The mortar flotilla consisted of twenty-one brigs and schooners, and was
divided into three squadrons of seven each. Besides these, five
steamers, the Harriet Lane, (flag-ship,) Miami, Owasco, Westfield, and
Clifton, were connected with the mortar flotilla, and these were
afterwards joined by the Octorora, a new boat, commanded by Captain
George Brown, of Indiana, which afterwards became Porter’s flag-ship.

The entire fleet, thus constituted, numbered forty-six vessels, carrying
two hundred and eighty-six guns. On the morning of April 16th, it made a
rendezvous in the river, at a distance of about four miles below Forts
Jackson and St. Philip, the two formidable fortifications on the river,
which it was necessary to pass before reaching the city of New Orleans.
On the morning of the 16th, Commodore Porter brought up several
schooners, and stationed them about two miles and a half from the forts,
in order to ascertain the range of the mortars before opening the
bombardment. After several hours of practice, in which the range was
admirably obtained, and the execution on the works was plainly visible,
Commodore Porter expressed himself fully satisfied, and suspended
operations for the night.

Fort Jackson, which is by far the stronger work, is a regular pentagonal
bastioned fortification, having two fronts bearing on the river, and
three on the land side. The land fronts have each a glacis and covered
way, and the channel is commanded by a battery of twenty-five guns. A
wet ditch, from forty to seventy feet wide, and six feet deep, surrounds
the main work on the river, and a similar ditch, one hundred and fifty
feet wide, the land fronts. There is also a wet ditch, six feet deep,
and thirty feet wide, around the channel-bearing battery. The two
channel-bearing fronts have each eight casemated guns, which are the
only casemated ones in the work. The ditches are defended by
twenty-four-pounder howitzers at either flank. The parapet is carried
across the gorge of the bastion, so that there is no flank parapet
defence. The bastions are only arranged for musketry fire from the
walls. The main work of the lower battery mounts in the aggregate one
hundred and twenty-five guns, of which one hundred bear on the channel.
There was a one-story brick citadel within the fort, having two tiers of
loop-holes for musketry defence, the walls of which are five feet thick.
The entrance to the work is by a wooden bridge on the west side,
connected with a draw bridge ten feet wide.

Fort St. Philip consists of a main work and two attached batteries,
which bear respectively up and down the river. The principal work is
irregular in form, having seventeen faces. It is surrounded by a wet
ditch six feet deep, and from twenty to thirty feet wide. At the foot of
the glacis is a ditch from seventy to one hundred and forty feet wide.
There is a glacis and covered way entirely around the fort. Outside of
the principal ditch is another, which was dug to furnish earth for the
levee, and this is twenty feet wide, and four feet deep. Fort St. Philip
mounts one hundred guns, of which seventy-five bear on the channel. All
the guns were mounted _en barbette_. The scarp works were strengthened
by relief arches, which were pierced with loop-holes for musketry.

Both forts are built of brick. The guns of Fort Jackson are twenty-five
feet above the level of the river, and those of St. Philip nineteen
feet. The guns of the outer batteries of both forts are fourteen feet
above the river. When the rebels took possession of these forts there
were only thirty-six guns mounted, none of which were of larger calibre
than thirty-two-pounders. All the carriages were poor. The plans for
completing these forts were taken from the Custom house at New Orleans,
just after the rebellion broke out, and the works were finished in
accordance with the original intention. From centre to centre of the
forts the distance is three-quarters of a mile, and the river between
them half a mile in width.

On the 17th the rebels commenced their defence against the Federal
fleet, by sending down the stream a fire raft. This incendiary messenger
was a common flat-boat, about one hundred and fifty feet long, fifty
broad and eight deep, filled with pine knots and other combustible
matter, which burned fiercely, and sent a dense column of black smoke
rolling heavily upwards as it was borne along by a fresh breeze that
blew up the river. As soon as the raft floated near enough it was fired
into and destroyed, without damage to the fleet, and then ran ashore. It
was a timely warning to the squadron, for during the day the vessels
were fitted up with grapnel-ropes, fire-buckets, axes and other
appliances with which to attack other of these fiery islands that might
be set adrift by the enemy.

The arrangements were scarcely completed, and the review made, when,
about ten o’clock at night, a brilliant fire appeared on the river,
flaming out from a heavy dense column of smoke, which rolled up and
displayed another of the fiery pioneers of the rebel flotilla lying near
the forts. It burned magnificently, and made a splendid pyrotechnic
display for the sailors, who were waiting impatiently to reach the grand
magazine whence it issued. Signals were made, and in a few moments a
vast crowd of boats were launched upon the waters and moved rapidly
toward the island of fire. The Westfield came plowing her way up and
plunged her prow into the blazing mass, at the same moment opening her
steam-pipes and pouring a heavy force of water into the hottest of the
conflagration. Amid the steam and smoke and seething struggle of the
flames, the men leaped upon the raft with their buckets, and completely
extinguished the fire. Then the blackened and smoking mass of logs was
sent contemptuously adrift to follow its companion.

The sailors of the mortar fleet enjoyed this amusement with the greatest
zest, and pursued their work among the logs with laughter and
enthusiastic cheering. When the floating monster had been sent blackened
and smoking down the river, they retired to their various boats and
slept soundly in preparation for the contest of the following day.

On the mortar fleet a portion of the day was given to the very singular
duty of disguising the vessels. Large quantities of branches were cut
from the forest trees on the banks of the river, which were bound with
all their fresh leaves to the masts, rigging, and around the hulls. This
was so adroitly done that from the distance it was impossible to
distinguish the fleet from the groups of trees on the banks, thus
concealing the position of the vessels entirely from the enemy.

On the following morning, Good Friday, April 18th, at early dawn, the
towing vessels of Commodore Porter’s fleet took each five mortar boats,
and proceeded up the river to their fighting station. The fleet thus in
motion presented a splendid spectacle—the noble steamers leading a group
of vessels, each embowered in green, as though some oasis of lofty trees
had migrated from their forest home and were on an excursion to a
distant shore. The larger number were anchored on the right bank of the
river, while five were put in position on the left bank.

At nine o’clock precisely, and before all the mortar boats had taken
their position, the rebels opened fire. It was instantly returned by the
mortars, and the grandest naval engagement of the war, and one of the
most memorable bombardments in the history of the world commenced.

For some time the fire of the forts fell short of the range, but after
about an hour their shot passed over the vessels and fell harmless
beyond the fleet. The mortar practice for the first half hour exhibited
a similar defect, but the range was then obtained, and the bombs fell
thick and fast over and around the entrenched foe. At ten o’clock the
Iroquois, Cayuga, Sciota and Wissahickon opened upon the forts with
their 11-inch shells and fifteen-second fuses.

The scene now became one of thrilling grandeur. The loud roar of the
mortars as they hurled their immense projectiles into the air, the quick
succession of guns from the war ships, and the rapid discharges from the
forts in reply; the flashes of fire, the clouds of smoke, as they rolled
blackly together, filling the air, and the shells flying up to a great
altitude, then pencilling their arching line against the blue sky as
they sped to their mark, passing and repassing in almost momentary
rapidity, presented a spectacle awfully sublime. At times eight or ten
of the destructive missiles were to be seen rushing away on their
errands of death and destruction at the same moment, sometimes exploding
and scattering the fragments in wide circles over the water, throwing it
up in vast silver columns, or on the shore plowing up the earth and
sending soil and foliage in thick masses high in the air.

The rebels diversified their operations during the day by again sending
two immense fire-rafts down the river, which would have occasioned much
confusion among the fleet, but for the precautions already taken, and
the previous experience of the sailors in the reception of these
pyrotechnic visitors. The sailors not employed at the guns were allowed
to witness the contest from the yards and rigging of the vessels. As
soon as the rafts appeared they were called down from their places,
manned the boats, and soon piloted these burning islands to the shore,
where they were left to smoulder away for the entertainment of the
fleet. These rafts were now regarded as a side-play. At six o’clock Fort
Jackson was reported to be on fire, and at half-past six the Harriet
Lane signalled the mortar boats to cease firing. Two of these boats were
struck during the day. The cabin of one was destroyed by a shot, and a
ball plunged through the magazine of another which sent her out of the
action for an hour in order to make repairs. The men on board had been
exhausted by their heavy labors, and when the night came they were
heartily glad to rest.

A morning of serene beauty dawned upon the fleet, with a light
south-east wind, that gradually increased in volume till about ten
o’clock. Notwithstanding the breeze, the sun was warm, and the heat
sometimes oppressive. At half-past six the mortar boats opened the
bombardment. The fire at first was slow, and the vessels which were on
the left bank of the river the day before, were placed in position on
the other bank near the anchorage. At seven o’clock the gunboats Oneida,
Pinola and Sciota were sent up to support and cover the mortar vessels,
while the Wissahickon and Cayuga were relieved—having been on duty
twenty-four hours. As soon as these vessels had opened fire, Fort
Jackson replied from her casemate guns, and kept up a very heavy fire.

At half-past eleven o’clock a rifle shot went through the schooner Maria
J. Carlton, and she sunk in about twenty minutes. Everything was saved
from her except the mortar, and only two or three men were injured
slightly by splinters.

Just after the sinking of the M. J. Carlton the gunboats Itasca and
Kineo were ordered into close action, the Owasco being sent up by
Captain Porter to assist. The firing now was frequent and terrific. Each
moment it seemed as if some one of the boats must be sunk. The Oneida
attracted much attention by her coolness and her heavy fire. At two
o’clock she was struck twice, one ten-inch solid shot from a Columbiad
striking a thirty-two pounder gun-carriage and knocking off one of the
trucks, and passing out of the ship on the port side. Shortly afterwards
another shot of the same description hit the forward part of the
starboard after port, striking the carriage of an eleven-inch pivot gun
and then lodging on deck. This shot wounded nine men, but none mortally.
One poor fellow lost his left hand. The pivot gun of the Oneida was not
injured, but the pivot rail was slightly damaged, and to repair it she
hauled out of action.

At about half-past three o’clock the firing from the forts began to
slacken. At four o’clock Fort Jackson was silent, and only the water
battery and Fort St. Philip were at work. The mortar shells were falling
all around the fort. One appeared to fall into the water battery soon
afterward, and silenced it. The gunboats were throwing shells with fine
effect, the Kineo in particular. At five o’clock General Butler and his
staff went on board the Hartford to confer with Commodore Farragut, and
at half-past six the signal was given to discontinue the firing.

A number of men were wounded during the day, and were placed on board of
the Katahdin, to be conveyed to the hospital at Pilot Town, down the
river.

Night closed around the fleet as it lay at its moorings. The
mortar-boats kept up the firing during the night at stated intervals, by
divisions, and so continued until the morning of Sunday, the 20th, when
the contest was renewed on both sides, with the same zeal and industry
as had marked the bombardment of the first two days. During the forenoon
a deserter from Fort Jackson came to the shore, and hailed one of the
mortar vessels. A boat was immediately dispatched to him, and he was
taken on board the Harriet Lane, where he had an interview with
Commodore Porter. He was a citizen of Pennsylvania, and reported that
great execution had been done by the well-directed fire of the fleet.

Commodore Farragut began to fear, from the protracted resistance of the
forts, that they would hold out so long that the supply of shells and
material of the fleet would become exhausted, and the enterprise result
in a simple blockade. He therefore issued orders for running the forts,
at an early opportunity, and arranged the vessels in several divisions
for this important undertaking, when the signal should be given to move.
While passing the forts, Commodore Porter’s mortar fleet were to engage
the batteries, in order to distract and divide the fire of the forts.

During the afternoon, Fort Jackson suspended its fire, but Fort St.
Philip sent its iron messengers about the fleet in a perfect hail,
without, however, doing much injury. After continuing this work for a
short time the fire was slackened, and gradually fell off, a shot only
being sent at long intervals.

During the afternoon preparations were made for removing the
obstructions which the rebels had placed in the river. The principal of
these was a strong and heavy iron chain thrown across the stream,
supported by six or eight vessels, which formed a line across from shore
to shore. Beyond this battery, and above the forts, lay a fleet of
eighteen gunboats, and a monster ram, called the _Manassas_, a massive
and heavily mailed vessel, built expressly for running down and
destroying any vessel that it might attack.

About two o’clock the expedition to accomplish this work started on its
errand. The night was as dark as could be desired, and, closely watched
by the fleet, the Itasca and Pinola left their moorings to cut the
chain, and, if possible, destroy some of the vessels supporting it. At a
given signal the mortar vessels, which had been keeping up a slow fire,
opened a tremendous volley of shell, presenting a spectacle which has
seldom been witnessed in naval warfare. The sky was like a vast arch in
conflagration from the explosions of the shells, which vaulted upwards,
and fell in a meteoric shower upon the forts. From three to eight or ten
were in the air almost all the time, and the beauty and grandeur of this
vast pyrotechnic display was heightened by the use of the Caston signal
lights. Dimly in the distance could be seen the Iroquois, Winona, and
Kennebec, who were in the advance of the mortar fleet. A signal light
was sent up from Fort Jackson, and both forts opened fire with all their
heavy guns.

An hour was spent in this manner, when the Pinola sent a boat down to
report that the chain was cut, and that the Itasca was ashore. The forts
had slackened their fire, and there was good cause to fear that if she
were not rescued before the moon rose, she would be captured by the
rebels. Orders were immediately sent to the picket boats, which repaired
to her aid, and although the project of blowing up some of the
supporting schooners was not accomplished, the vessels all returned in
safety, having cleared the river of its barrier. The mortar fleet then
subsided into the accustomed routine of a bombshell at regular
intervals, to prove to the rebels at the forts that their visitors were
at the post of duty.

At two o’clock on Monday morning, the 21st, the moon rose clear and
beautiful, lighting up the entire scene. It was the fourth day of the
bombardment, and with accustomed promptitude the entertainment of the
day commenced with a fire raft, sent down the river from Fort Jackson,
larger and more formidable than any that had preceded it. The current
was running swiftly, the wind was fresh, and the blazing mass sped
fiercely over its watery pathway. It burned with terrific fury, a high
wind sweeping its flames back in fiery banners; while the pine knots,
crackling and roaring, sent their forked flames leaping like tongues of
fire through the dense column of smoke which rolled its huge black pall
against the azure of the sky, as it floated past the fleet, scattering a
storm of harmless fire on the water. The mortar boats took it in charge,
and the men fell to work extinguishing the flames. When this was done it
was towed ashore to keep company with its forerunners, a harmless,
charred mass of timbers.

During the day the bombardment was continued. The forts for a time
responded with more determination even than they had previously
exhibited. Attempts were made by the rebels to repair the massive
fragments of the chain, and to destroy one of the Federal vessels by a
submarine torpedo, but without success. The fifth day proved like the
others, but it became apparent that the crisis of the contest was
approaching. The mortar boats continued their usual practice during the
night, and on the return of day, (Wednesday, the 23d,) renewed the
severer labors of the bombardment.

There was an ominous silence on the part of the forts. The look-outs at
the mast-heads reported that the shells were doing their work at Fort
St. Philip, and that there were twelve steamers in sight. The forts
maintained profound silence during the day, and this circumstance
occasioned much discussion on the Federal vessels. On consideration, it
was deemed that the time had come to hazard an attempt to run the forts,
destroy the rebel fleet, and ascend to New Orleans. The Itasca was
selected as the picket boat, to advance and ascertain whether the chain
had been repaired; and the fleet of ships and gunboats was alive with
enthusiasm and excitement, at the prospect of running the gauntlet of
fire which would be opened on either side when their desperate attempt
became known. Not only were the two forts to be passed, but the rebel
fleet, with its monster of destruction, the Manassas, and the fire-rafts
which would be let loose upon them, to spread conflagration and death in
their most fearful forms: while a foe desperate with energy and hate,
was working the formidable engines of destruction.

At eleven o’clock, P. M., the Itasca signalled that the chain was clear.
Everything was quiet around the fleet, save the hissing of the steam as
it escaped from the boilers. The night was moderately dark, and a gentle
southerly wind made the weather rather hazy. The mortar vessels kept up
an incessant roar, and bright globes ascended high aloft to curve
downward in fury at the forts. The second division, under Captain Bailey
(of the Colorado), formed on the left bank of the river, while the third
division was in the centre of the lines—the first division lying on the
right bank of the river.

The fleet was to sail in the following order:—

_First Division_—Flag-officer Farragut commanding: Hartford, Brooklyn,
Richmond.

_Second Division_—Captain Bailey commanding: Cayuga, Pensacola,
Mississippi, Oneida, Varuna, Katahdin, Kineo, Wissahickon, Portsmouth,
towed by J. P. Jackson.

_Third Division_—Captain Bell commanding: Sciota, Iroquois, Pinola,
Itasca, Winona, Kennebec.

At one o’clock all hands were called, hammocks stowed, and everything
put in readiness to weigh.

At two o’clock on the morning of the 24th, red lights at the peak of the
Hartford announced the time to get underweigh. At three o’clock the moon
rose, and a silvery path was marked out on the swift waters of the
river, so soon to be the scene of one of the grandest naval fights known
to history. The moon had lifted itself above the horizon just thirty
minutes, when the fleet sailed in order for the battle-ground. In the
dim distance could be seen the signal fires of the enemy, built to light
up the river, and reveal the position of the fleet.

At precisely twenty minutes of four o’clock the enemy opened fire from
Fort St. Philip. At that moment the star-spangled banner was hoisted at
the peak of the Hartford. Full speed was given to the ship, the
engineers performed their duty nobly, and on she went, as it were, into
the jaws of death. At the time the enemy opened fire the mortar vessels
went to work, and the rapidity with which they threw shells at the enemy
was terrific.

At five minutes to four o’clock the bow gun of the Hartford belched
forth fire and smoke, and a messenger, in the shape of a nine-inch
shell, was sent to Fort Jackson. In a few minutes more the broadside
firing was commenced. Both forts were replying as fast as they could.
Broadside after broadside was delivered to them in rapid succession,
while the mortar vessels lent their aid to make the scene one of
wonderful grandeur.

[Illustration:

  BOMBARDMENT OF FORTS JACKSON AND ST. PHILIP, APRIL 24, 1862.

  1. Fort Jackson.
  2. Fort St. Philip.
  3. Federal Ships of War and Gunboats.
  4. Rebel Gunboats and Rams.
]

A scene like this has probably never before been witnessed. Steadily the
vessels steamed on, the forts firing rifle shot and shell, ten-inch
columbiads, forty-two, thirty-two and twenty-four pounder balls, while
the thirteen steamers of the enemy, and the floating battery Louisiana,
were pouring into and around the fleet a storm of iron perfectly
indescribable. Not satisfied with this, one fire raft after another was
kindled, and set adrift to do their fiery work. The ram was busy trying
to force them under the bows of the Federal vessels. One of them
approached the Hartford, when Captain Broome opened on her with two
nine-inch guns. An explosion—a loud burst of terrific cries and wails,—a
careen, and the rebel steamer, with its wretched multitude of victims,
plunged beneath the waters, and disappeared from view. The rebel vessels
were crowded with troops, who fired volleys of rifle balls, most of
which did no harm. Their steamers were bold and fearless; but no sooner
did they come in sight of our gunners than they were sunk. The Varuna
sunk six of them one after another.

In the midst of this awful scene a tremendous fire raft came down the
river, and the ram shoved her under the port-quarter of the Hartford.
The flames caught her rigging and side, and for a moment it seemed as
though the flag-ship must fall a prey to the flames. A fire was also
burning on the berth-deck. The fire hose was on hand, and the crew soon
subdued the flames, and gave the ram a return of rifle shell. She,
however, returned to the onset, when some other vessel assaulted her,
and she hauled off. During this stage of affairs the Hartford grounded,
and her fate seemed to be sealed; but the men worked splendidly, and the
engineers soon got the ship astern and afloat. The scene of the
engagement at this time almost defies the power of description. The
river and its banks were one sheet of flame, and the messengers of death
were moving with lightning swiftness in all directions. Steadily the
Federal fleet poured upon the enemy their shell and grape, interspersed
with shrapnel. The rebel boats were fast being riddled by well directed
broadsides, and their commanders who were able made for the shore to run
them on the bank and save their lives. Some were on fire and others were
sinking. The crews of the Union fleet broke out in frequent cheers as
they saw the havoc that was made, and the retreat of the rebel vessels.
The flag-ship had been on fire three times, and was riddled from stem to
stern. The cabin was completely shattered, the starboard steerage torn
up, and the armory severely damaged.

After being under a terrific fire for one hour and twenty minutes, the
Federal vessels passed the forts. The flag-ship was badly cut up with a
shot through the mainmast, two in the stern, and several through her.
Language cannot give an adequate idea of the engagement. Wrapped up in
smoke, shot and shell were whistling around, above, before and in the
rear; flames from fire-rafts encircling the ships, splinters flying in
all directions, shells bursting overhead; while the roar and booming of
the guns rolled almost incessantly, and made the contest as destructive
as it was terrible.

So effective had been the work of the fleet, that at half-past five
o’clock no less than eleven rebel steamers were in flames along each
side of the river. The Federal vessels steamed up to the Quarantine to
anchor, when the Manassas made her appearance, and saucily fired at the
Richmond.

The Mississippi being near at hand, put about for the ram, with the
intention of running her down. The Manassas endeavored to elude the
attack, but finding the Mississippi gaining on her, ran into the bank of
the river, and immediately about thirty men came up out of the hatch and
went on shore. The Mississippi fired two or three broadsides into her,
and boarded her, but finding that she was of no importance, again fired
into her, and she drifted down the river, sinking very fast.

Besides the ram, the rebels had a heavy floating battery, called the
Louisiana, which carried eight large guns, and which occasioned a good
deal of annoyance, although, to use the language of the Charleston
_Mercury_, it was a complete failure. In addition to this, they had an
immense steam-ram, called the Mississippi, which had just been launched,
but which was then unfinished. She was a propeller, with three screws
and six engines, and to be mounted with twenty guns of the largest
calibre. She was twice as large and powerful as the Merrimac, and
without a gun would have been almost sufficient to have run down the
Federal fleet. There was, however, about forty days’ work required to
complete her, and to prevent her falling into the hands of the victors,
she was scuttled, set on fire and sunk.

At six A. M., the Varuna, Commander Boggs, was attacked by the Morgan,
iron-clad about the bow, commanded by Beverly Kennion, an ex-naval
officer. This vessel raked her along the port gangway, killing four and
wounding nine of the crew, butting the Varuna on the quarter, and again
on the starboard side. Three three-inch shells were fired into her abaft
her armor, also several shot from the after rifled gun, when she dropped
out of action, partially disabled.

While still engaged with her, another rebel steamer, iron-clad, with a
prow under water, struck the Varuna in the port gangway, doing
considerable damage. The Varuna’s shot glanced from her bow. She backed
off for another blow, and struck again in the same place, crushing in
the side; but by going ahead fast, the concussion drew her bow around,
and the Varuna was able with the port guns to give her, while close
alongside, five eight-inch shells abaft her armor. This settled her and
drove her ashore in flames. Finding the Varuna sinking, she was run into
the bank, when they let go her anchor, and tied her up to the trees.
During all this time the guns were actively at work, crippling the
Morgan, which was making feeble efforts to get up steam.

The fire was kept up until the water was over the gun-trucks, when
attention was turned to getting the wounded and the crew out of the
vessel. The Oneida, Captain Lee, seeing the condition of the Varuna, had
rushed to her assistance, but was not needed, and the Morgan surrendered
to her, having over fifty of her crew killed and wounded. She was set on
fire by her commander.

In fifteen minutes from the time the Varuna was struck, she was on the
bottom, with only her topgallant forecastle out of water. The officers
and crew lost everything they possessed, no one thinking of leaving his
station until driven thence by water.

The Federal vessels made their rendezvous at the Quarantine, some miles
above the forts, and took possession of the camp of the Chalmette
regiment of rebel sharpshooters, some of whom escaped, while the others
surrendered, and were paroled. The officers were taken to the flag-ship
and paroled. The wounded men of the various ships were now carefully
attended to. The heroic dead who had fallen in defence of their flag
were taken ashore, and laid in their last resting-place, in a manner
worthy of the cause in which they had shed their blood, and the national
flag was left floating over their graves. The Federal loss was 30 killed
and 120 wounded. The loss of the rebels was very severe, some of the
estimates making it as high as 800 or 1,000 in killed and wounded.


                      THE SURRENDER OF THE FORTS.

When the fleet started in its attempt to pass the forts, the mortar
vessels opened a tremendous fire, which was continued until five
o’clock, when they were signalled to cease. During the forenoon,
Commodore Porter dispatched Captain Grant, in the Owasco, with a flag of
truce, to demand the surrender of the forts. The vessel approached Fort
St. Philip to within about a mile, when the batteries were opened upon
her and five shots were fired, upon which she withdrew. The flag of
truce was hauled down, but soon afterwards a boat flying a flag of truce
at her bows, and the secession flag at her stern, approached, and
Captain Grant went out and held a conference with the rebel officer. He
offered an apology in behalf of his superior officer for the
unintentional firing upon the flag of truce, declaring that its color
had not been seen, and could not be distinguished in the distance. He
then returned to the fort, and the bombs again commenced their thunders,
which lasted until Commodore Porter ordered the fleet down the river.

Oh the 25th, Commodore Porter sent six of the mortar vessels to guard
the bayous in the rear of Fort Jackson, when three of them, the Henry
Janes, Kittatinny and Geo. W. Maryham, on the 26th, drifted off to Fort
Livingston, a stronghold of the rebels, guarding one of the passages.
There was a flag of truce flying on the fort, and on boats being sent
ashore, they found the place deserted by all except several men, women
and children, who resided on the island. The Federals found eleven
32-pounders, three 12-pound howitzers, two 24-pounders, one 8-inch
columbiad, one 80-pound rifled cannon, one thousand 32-pound shot, and
other articles of minor importance. The fort was in good condition, with
all its property. It was left in charge of Acting Master Tamsen, of the
U. S. navy.

On the 28th, Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins, commanding the forts, sent a
communication to the Commodore, offering to surrender. The Harriet Lane
(flag-ship) accordingly steamed up to the forts, and received the
commander on board, when the articles of capitulation were drawn up and
signed. Not to prolong the contest by very exacting terms, Commodore
Porter received the forts and property, and allowed Brigadier-General
Duncan, commander of coast defences, and Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins,
commanding the forts, to retain their side arms, under parole. The other
officers and privates were to retire on parole, giving up all arms and
accoutrements, the United States to transport the men from the forts.

Three steamers of the rebel fleet remained, and were under the direction
of Commander J. K. Mitchell. Lieutenant-Colonel Higgins said he had no
command over them, and was not responsible for their conduct. While the
flag of truce was up, and the capitulation was under conference, they
towed the iron floating battery, Louisiana, to a place above the forts,
set it on fire, and turned it adrift upon the Federal fleet. The guns
soon becoming heated, began to discharge, throwing their shot around the
river, and in a little while the battery itself exploded with a terrific
report, scattering the fragments all over the river, and wounding one of
their own men in Fort St. Philip.

As soon as the terms of capitulation were concluded and signed,
Commodore Porter started for the rebel fleet. One vessel had been sunk
by the Federal guns during the consultation, and another was taken by
the Commodore. He immediately put the officers in close confinement, for
the attempt to blow up the Federal vessels while under the flag of
truce.

While the reduction and surrender of the forts was effected apparently
by the fleet, it was evident that they could have held out in defiance
of the bombardment for an indefinite period. The successful passage of
the gunboat fleet threw an immense force above the forts, while a
competent force remained below. In addition to this, General Butler had
succeeded in finding a passage for a portion of his land forces through
the channels in the rear of Fort St. Philip, and thus threatened the
forts in a direction where they were easily vulnerable. Under these
circumstances a considerable part of the garrison revolted, on the night
of the 27th, refused to serve, and demanded a surrender, because defence
was no longer of the least service to their main purpose, that of
defending the approach to the city. The discontented part of the troops,
about two hundred in number, were permitted to leave the fort, and they
proceeded to the Quarantine and gave themselves up to General Butler.
This timely co-operation of General Butler led to the decision of the
commander, and on the following morning the capitulation was completed,
and the national flag was restored to the walls of Forts Jackson and St.
Philip.

The forts were placed in command of General Phelps. Fort Jackson
suffered most from the bombardment, the chief object being to compel its
surrender, Commodore Porter knowing that the other would inevitably
follow. Nearly 8,000 shells and round shot were thrown from the Federal
fleet, of which more than 2,000 fell into or exploded over the forts.
More than 1,100 were counted on the ground near the forts, lying around
after the capture.


                     THE OCCUPATION OF NEW ORLEANS.

At eleven o’clock, A. M., on the 24th, the flag-ship raised her anchor,
and led the way up the river towards New Orleans. Commander Farragut had
been apprised of the obstacles which he would meet, and was therefore
prepared to encounter them. There was no occurrences of moment on the
way up the river, except the demonstrations of joy or of opposition made
by the people, according to their loyal or disloyal sympathies. Boats
loaded with cotton were burnt or burning along the river as they passed,
and fragments of the Mississippi battery floated down the stream.

At about the same hour of the next day, the fleet reached two forts, one
on either side of the river, about two miles below the city, known as
the Chalmette batteries, which had no flags flying. At eleven o’clock
they opened on the Cayuga, which was then in the advance. After a short
time spent in firing the bow-guns, the Hartford poured in a terrific
broadside, which appeared to be very destructive. Other discharges
followed from other vessels, and the garrison abandoned the works
without hoisting a flag. The guns being silenced, and the forts
evacuated, the fleet passed on and came to anchor opposite the city
about one o’clock. The river was filled with vessels on fire, and along
the levee cotton, stores, and other property were wantonly burned,
filling the atmosphere with suffocating smoke, and adding to the heat of
the day. Vast amounts of property were thus destroyed. On shore and on
the wharves the people hastened to and fro, some cheering for Jeff.
Davis and the Confederacy, Beauregard, and others, while some of the
more exulting loyalists cheered for the Union and the old flag.

[Illustration:

  NEW ORLEANS AND VICINITY.

  SHOWING THE DISTANCES ON THE MISSISSIPPI, AND THE ISLANDS BY THEIR
    NUMBERS.
]

At two o’clock Commodore Farragut sent Captain Bailey on shore to
communicate with the authorities, and demand a surrender of the city. He
started with a flag of truce, and on reaching the levee was greeted with
curses by the mob. With some difficulty he reached the City Hall, with
the officer who accompanied him, and there found the Mayor, City
Council, and General Lovell, the commander of the rebel forces in the
city. New Orleans being under martial law, the civil authorities could
do nothing, and General Lovell declared he would never surrender it. He
was informed that the city was then in the power of the Federal fleet,
and the responsibility of any suffering or destruction that might follow
his obstinate determination must rest with him. If no resistance were
made, nothing would be injured. General Lovell then agreed to evacuate
the city, and restore it to the control of the civil authorities.
Captain Bailey and Lieutenant Perkins entered a carriage and returned to
their boats. Just before they reached the levee, the new ram
Mississippi, already mentioned, floated down the river wrapt in flames.
The rebels had attempted to tow her up the river, but finding some of
the Federal vessels on the alert in pursuit, they set her on fire. Two
or three other similar vessels, partly built, were in the shipyards of
the city and Algiers, on the other side of the river, which were also
destroyed.

When the news of the passage of the forts by the Federal fleet had been
telegraphed to the city, the popular excitement was unbounded. Under
apprehension that the city would be pillaged, and given up to the
violence of a body of Northern desperadoes, the mob, led on by some of
the most bitter secessionists, were anxious to fire the public
buildings, and reduce the city to ruin in advance. But other counsels
prevailed, and they were fortunately restrained from the commission of
these atrocities.

On the following morning, the 26th, at half-past six o’clock, the Mayor
sent his secretary and chief of police to see the Commodore, informing
him that he would call a meeting of the Council at ten o’clock.
Commodore Farragut replied to the message of the Mayor, and sent him a
formal demand for the unqualified surrender of the city. The Council
met, and on hearing a message from the Mayor, John T. Monroe, that body
adopted resolutions in accordance with the message, and the Mayor made a
reply to the Commodore, stating that the city was subject to his power.
Both the message of the Mayor, and his reply to Commodore Farragut,
breathed a spirit of bold defiance to the Federal authority, declaring
that they submitted only to stern necessity, and that they still
maintained their allegiance to the Confederate States.

At ten o’clock two officers were sent on shore, with a body of marines,
to raise the flag on the Custom House; but the protest of the Mayor was
so urgent, under the apprehension that the mob would resist this attempt
to plant the old flag in its rightful place, that the Commodore deemed
it advisable to recall the order. About the same time the Pensacola sent
a boat to raise the flag on the mint. A general order for a thanksgiving
service at eleven o’clock, on shipboard, had been issued, for the
success of the expedition, and while thus engaged, the stars and stripes
were torn down by a mob. The Pensacola fired a howitzer, killing one
man, which occasioned intense excitement.

On the surrender of the forts, General Butler hastened with his forces
to the city, where he arrived, with his transports, on the afternoon of
the 28th.

On the morning of the 29th, Pierre Soulé, one of the most prominent men
of New Orleans, visited the Commodore for the purpose of a private
interview. Soon after he left the ship, the marines of the fleet went
ashore in the small boats to raise the flag on the Custom House and Post
Office. Two howitzers were in the company, to assist, if necessary, in
maintaining order. The duty of hauling down the State flag of Louisiana,
and replacing it with the national emblem, was assigned to Commander H.
H. Bell. When the boats reached the levee, the men formed in line of
march, and proceeded to the Custom House, where the stars and stripes
were once more flung to the southern breeze. After leaving the Custom
House, they proceeded to the City Hall, where Captain Bell generously
yielded the distinction of raising the flag to George Russell,
boatswain’s mate of the Hartford, who had won general approbation by his
heroic conduct.

General Butler established his headquarters in the city, proclaimed
martial law, and commenced his administration without opposition. With
this peaceful and successful result was crowned one of the most
brilliant achievements in naval history.




                      THE EVACUATION OF YORKTOWN.

                              MAY 4, 1862.


As the month of April was passing away, dispatches from the peninsula
gave assurances that the two great armies now confronting each other
before Yorktown would in a few days be compelled to test their relative
strength in a general engagement, should neither, meantime, voluntarily
abandon the position. The daily bulletin of casualties gave evidence of
closer and more sanguinary contests among the working or reconnoitering
parties, or from the batteries erected on new parallels of rugged
embankments springing up daily in closer proximity. A most arduous
portion of the soldiers’ labor during the siege is thus graphically
described:

WORKING IN THE TRENCHES.—A working party is detailed for night duty.
With muskets slung on their backs and shovels and picks on their
shoulders, they proceed to the selected ground. The white tape marks the
line of excavation—the dark lanterns are “faced to the rear”—the muskets
are carefully laid aside—the shovels are in hand, and each man silently
commences to dig. Not a word is spoken—not one spade clicks against
another. Each man first digs a hole large enough to cover himself—he
then turns and digs to his right-hand neighbor. Then the ditch deepens
and widens, and the parapet rises. Yet all is silent—the relief comes
and the weary ones retire. The words and jests of the enemy are often
heard, while no noise from the men disturbs the stillness save the dull
rattle of the earth as each spadeful is thrown to the top. At daylight a
long line of earthworks, affording complete protection, greets the
astonished eyes of the enemy, while the sharpshooters’ bullets whisper
terror to his ears.

On the 2d of May the rebels opened fire from an immense gun mounted on a
pivot at a corner of the main fort on the heights of Yorktown, which
inflicted serious injury on the Federals, who replied with much spirit
from their No. 1 battery, mounting one and two hundred-pounder Parrot
guns. On the twenty-third discharge of the enemy’s gun it burst into a
thousand pieces, tearing up the parapet, and making fearful havoc among
the immense crowd surrounding it. The Federal guns on No. 1 battery were
then brought to bear on the rebel works at Yorktown and Gloucester, and
on their shipping, with marked effect, to which they were unable to
reply.

From the 1st to the 4th of May the Confederate army evacuated Yorktown,
without awaking the suspicions of the besiegers, making a safe retreat
with all their field artillery and most of their stores. Eighty heavy
guns at Yorktown and Gloucester, with large quantities of ordnance
stores, fell into possession of the Federals, who occupied the rebel
ramparts on the morning of the fourth.

On the same day the iron battery Merrimac made her appearance off
Sewall’s Point, and the Federal gunboats availed themselves of the
opportunity to go up the York river, convoying a portion of the army
transports, with the design of intercepting the retreating enemy, while
most of the cavalry and horse artillery, followed by the infantry,
started in immediate pursuit by land.

When within two and a half miles of Williamsburg, at two o’clock on May
4th, General Stoneman’s advance came up with the enemy, who threw out a
body of cavalry to check the pursuit. Captain Gibbon’s battery was
brought to bear on the horsemen, who on their approach were met by a
charge of the First and Sixth regular cavalry, who drove them back,
capturing twenty-five of their number. Two of the Federals were killed,
and about twenty wounded; and twenty of Captain Gibbon’s horses were
killed.




                      THE BATTLE OF WILLIAMSBURG.

                              MAY 5, 1862.


The evacuation of Yorktown, which occupied several days, was completed
on the morning of Sunday, the 4th of May, the main body of the
retreating rebels taking the principal road through Williamsburg, and
smaller portions of the army passing along the road near the banks of
the York river. A line of entrenchments had been run about two and a
half miles from Williamsburg, and became the scene of a fiercely
contested engagement on May 5th.

The rebel forces had succeeded in passing through the city, and left a
force of about five thousand men to engage and retard the advance of the
Union army.

The approach to Williamsburg from the lower part of the peninsula is by
two roads, one on the James river side, from Warwick court-house, and
the other from Yorktown, on the York river side. Both these roads lead
through a dense forest, broken only by occasional openings, and over
alternate soils of sand, reddish clay and swamp. The heavy rains had
saturated the soil, and the retreat of the rebels, with their ponderous
trains, had cut the roads up to an extent that made them almost
impassable. In very many places where they led over swampy ground,
horses and wagons would sink together, and other teams were necessary to
draw them out and place them upon soil that was firm only by comparison.
This was the general character of both these roads. They gradually
approach each other through the forest, and meet at a sharp angle about
forty rods beyond the edge of the forest, in a large open plain, which
stretches away on either side, and lies directly in front of the village
of Williamsburg, at a distance of about two miles. Beyond this
intersection of the two roads, and directly ahead, was a long earthwork,
some hundred rods in advance, called Fort Page, (also called Fort
Magruder,) commanding with its guns and the infantry who were concealed
behind its walls both these converging roads. Looking to the right, the
eye ranges over a broad open field, stretching a mile or more away, with
a rolling surface, backed by a swamp, and dotted with five separate
earthworks, placed to command the plain in advance and concentrate their
cross-fire upon the troops approaching by the roads. Looking to the
left, there are three other works of a similar character, commanding the
approaches on that side. Here the woods came closer up to the road, and
for a space of some twenty or thirty acres lying along the James river
road, the trees had been cut down, and the ground in part had been
filled with rifle-pits.

[Illustration:

  BIRDS-EYE VIEW OF THE COUNTRY FROM RICHMOND TO YORKTOWN.

  1. Richmond.—2. Manchester.—3. Hanover C. H.—4. Mechanicsville.—5.
    Beaver Dam.—6. Gaines Mills.—7. New Bridge.—8. Cold Harbor.—9.
    Garnetts.—10. Golding.—11. Trent.—12. Couch.—13. Savage’s
    Station.—14. Fair Oaks.—15. Seven Oaks.—16. Bottoms Bridge.—17.
    White Oaks Bridge and Swamp.—18. Charles City Roads.—19. Malvern
    Hills.—20. Turkey Bridge.—21. Turkey Creek.—22. Turkey Island
    Bend.—23. Berkeley.—24. Harrison’s Landing.—25. City Point.—26. Fort
    Darling.—27. Dispatch Station.—28. Summit.—29. White House.—30.
    Cumberland Landing.—31. New Kent C. H.—32. West Point.—33.
    Williamsburg.—34. Yorktown.—35. Gloucester Point.—36. James
    River.—37. Chickahominy River.—38. York River.—39. Pamunky
    River.—40. Mattapony River.—41. Riemkatank River.—42. Rappahannock
    River.—43. Richmond and York Railroad.—44. Virginia Central
    Railroad.—45. Richmond and Fredericksburg Railroad.—46. Richmond and
    Danville Railroad.—47. Petersburg and Richmond Railroad.—48.
    Appamotox.
]

As soon as the evacuation of Yorktown was ascertained, on Sunday
morning, General Stoneman, with several regiments of cavalry, followed
by light field batteries, including horse artillery, started in pursuit
of the enemy. About noon General Hooker’s division left the camp in
front of Yorktown, followed by General Kearney’s division, both
belonging to General Heintzelman’s corps, and marched towards
Williamsburg, to support General Stoneman, and assist him in cutting off
the enemy’s retreat. The cavalry followed close upon the rear guard of
the enemy, and during the day there was occasional skirmishing between
them. After having advanced about six miles the cavalry halted to await
the arrival of the infantry. The divisions of Generals Smith and Hooker
met at a crossing of the roads, and continued on their routes, and met
again at the junction below Fort Page. It was now late in the day, and
General Sumner, who desired to engage the enemy, was compelled to defer
an attack until the morning.

The troops bivouacked at night in the best positions they could secure.
General Hooker’s division was in front of the centre of the enemy’s
works. General Smith’s infantry, and General Stoneman’s artillery and
cavalry were on the right. Generals Kearney and Couch had also come up,
and halted in the rear, while other divisions took position where they
could be disposed to the best advantage. Rain had fallen almost
constantly during the day, and now a stormy night drew its dark mantle
over them, while the wearied army lay upon the wet earth, and sought
repose.

Early on the following morning, the 5th, the troops commenced their
march, and soon came up to the point where the road passes out of the
woods into the open plain before the fort. The first who came up formed
a part of General Hooker’s division. As they advanced from the James
river road to the opening, they were greeted with a storm of balls and
grape from the bastion; and as the men were deployed in the woods, and
attempted to pass over the fallen timber, they were met by a heavy fire
from the rebel infantry, close in front, concealed in their rifle-pits
or behind the trees.

General Hooker ordered up Bramhall’s battery, but just as it left the
woods and was coming out into the open ground, the wheels stuck fast in
the deep clay mire, in which the horses vainly floundered in the effort
to draw them out. The rebels had pushed their infantry into the woods on
their right, and were pouring deadly volleys into the ranks of the
Federal troops, which compelled them to retire. One gun was abandoned.
General Hooker’s men struggled nobly against the terrible disadvantages
under which they were fighting,—for the rebels, seeing the progress they
were making, sent back for reinforcements, and they increased during the
day until not less than twenty-five thousand of their troops turned back
from their retreat.

As the enemy gradually augmented in number, the fight became more
severe, and was hotly contested on both sides. General Hooker had
resolved to maintain his position. General Grover’s brigade, (the First,
Eleventh and Sixteenth Massachusetts, and Second New Hampshire,) was on
the left; General Sickles’ brigade, (the First, Second, Third, Fourth
and Fifth Excelsior of New York,) and General Patterson’s New Jersey
brigade, (the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh and Eighth,) occupied positions
nearer the right of the column. Near these were company “H,” United
States First Artillery, Captain Bramhall, and company “O,” New York
Volunteer Artillery, Captain Smith. These regiments took positions along
the edge of the woods, and the artillery opened on the forts, when the
struggle became general nearly along the whole line.

At an early period of the battle it was perceived that the enemy was
endeavoring to turn the left of the Federal line, when a part of the
First and the Eleventh Massachusetts were ordered forward to anticipate
and prevent the movement. While the Eleventh was engaged at a point
about fifty yards from the enemy, a rebel officer displayed a white
flag, and shouted, “Don’t fire on your friends!” Colonel Blaisdell
immediately ordered his men to cease firing, and Michael Doherty, a
private of company A, stepped forward to meet the flag, upon which the
officer called out to his men, “Now, give it to them!” The command was
immediately obeyed, and a heavy fire was poured into the regiment, by
which a number of men were cut down. Doherty fell among the rest, but he
fired his piece at the dastardly officer, who fell dead upon the spot.

The First Massachusetts remained at its post, doing severe execution
among the enemy until all its ammunition had been expended, when it was
relieved by the Seventy-second New York, Lieutenant-Colonel Moses, which
was in turn relieved by the Seventieth New York, Colonel Dwight, who was
also aided by a portion of the Second New Hampshire.

The reinforcements of the enemy were pouring in, and adding continually
to the severity of the struggle. Colonel Moses was ordered to the front,
for the purpose of silencing a battery on the left. He was soon
confronted with a most murderous fire, when he was relieved by the
Seventieth New York. The rebel regiments in front were reinforced by
another, and soon successfully engaged. Colonel Dwight was slightly
wounded in the leg, and Colonel Farnum, being severely wounded, was
carried to the rear. The regiment fought with determined bravery,
against superior numbers, when Colonel Dwight ordered a charge through
the fallen timber. The Soldiers, with invigorating cheers, advanced upon
the rebels, and with irresistible ardor put them to flight. The regiment
held its position till its ammunition was exhausted, and then supplied
themselves from the cartridge-boxes of their dead and wounded comrades.

On came the rebel reinforcements. Massive and determined columns pressed
forward, and at last the helpless regiment, which had expended all its
ammunition, was pressed vigorously by the enemy, and Colonel Dwight and
many of his men were taken prisoners. They were carried to Williamsburg,
where they were rescued the next day, when the Federal army reached that
city. The heroism of this regiment may be seen from the fact that out of
thirty-three commissioned officers who went into the action, no less
than twenty-two were killed or wounded.

[Illustration:

  BATTLE OF WILLIAMSBURG.
]

The engagement had now become one of grand proportions. Two regiments of
the New Jersey brigade were conducted by General Patterson to the front,
to assist in repelling another attempt of the enemy to turn the Federal
left. They occupied the heavy timber which interrupted the view of the
enemy’s works. When they advanced they were also met by fresh regiments
of the enemy, and for a time the advantage alternated between the
contending forces, and the tide of battle was seen to ebb and flow on
either side, uncertain as to the issue. The forces of the enemy suffered
severely as well as the Federals, who delivered their fire while lying
upon the ground. Just then, Colonel Johnson came up with the Eighth New
Jersey, in time to check the flanking movement of the enemy, which was
rapidly reaching round to the left. Again the orders of the rebel
officers, to the front and rear were heard, and again the surging
columns of the foe were met and driven back. In this position for nearly
five hours the New Jersey brigade stood the fire of superior numbers,
and with all the coolness and determination of veterans resisted the
advance of the enemy. At a late hour in the day the arrival of fresh
troops relieved them from the ground they had disputed with such
undaunted courage.

Generals Heintzelman and Sumner united their commands toward the right,
on the line of the Yorktown road. General Hooker, finding himself so
severely pressed, sent to General Heintzelman for reinforcements, but he
was away, and the message was read and returned to General Hooker by
General Sumner, who endorsed it, “opened and read by the senior officer
on the field.” After some time spent in painful suspense by General
Hooker, he was cheered by the arrival of General Peck with his brigade,
forming the advance of General Couch’s division, which arrived on the
ground at one o’clock, having marched up from Lee’s Mills, ten or twelve
miles, that morning, in the midst of a pouring rain, and through mud
ankle deep. General Hooker being sorely pressed, the men were marched at
once into the field, taking a position on his right, in the centre of
the army, where they were at once exposed to the full force of the
enemy’s fire. For two hours they held their position against terrible
odds. Twice they were driven back, and twice they rallied again, and
recovered their ground.

When the brigade first reached the field, the One Hundred and Second
Pennsylvania advanced to the front, delivered its fire, and fell back,
giving place to the Ninety-eighth Pennsylvania, which held the ground
until the One Hundred and Second rallied, and the two maintained the
position. The Fifty-fifth New York, De Trobrian’s Zouaves, came up on
the left and then retired, while the Sixty-second New York held the
rebels in check, and the One Hundred and Second and Ninety-eighth
Pennsylvania delivered a cross-fire. The Fifty-fifth then formed a new
line of battle, and advanced to the support of the Sixty-second, and the
Ninety-third Pennsylvania came up and opened fire on a battery
commanding the road, until the rebels were driven back at all points.

The Federal reinforcements were at last coming up to the scene of
action. Urgent requests for aid had been sent to the rear, and Governor
Sprague rode back from the field to Yorktown, to report the facts to
General McClellan and urge forward the requisite assistance. In the mean
time General Kearney, with his division, a part of General Heintzelmar’s
corps, had received orders from him to press on with the utmost haste,
which was done. He arrived, closely followed by General Berry, with his
brigade, when they took a position on the extreme left, in order to
prevent flanking by the enemy. The Third Michigan was ordered to the
left as a support, while General Berry moved forward with the remaining
regiments, arriving on the ground at about half-past two o’clock, P. M.
The Fifth Michigan, Colonel Terry, proceeded to the left of the road, in
front of some fallen timber and the rifle-pits, while the Thirty-seventh
New York, Colonel Hayman, went still further to the left. The Second
Michigan occupied a position on the right of the road. As soon as these
arrangements were completed, an order was given for the troops under
General Berry to advance and charge, which they did in a splendid
manner, driving the enemy entirely out of the timber. At this charge the
enemy lost sixty-three men killed. The rebels, being posted in the
rifle-pits, caused the Federal troops much annoyance. The Fifth
Michigan, however, soon compelled them to retreat, although it lost a
great many of its men in the effort.

The enemy had the advantage of protection, while the Union men were
obliged to expose themselves in bold relief. The Federal bullets could
not penetrate the earthworks around the rifle-pits, and the only way to
drive the enemy out was to make a bayonet charge. This charge was made
in splendid style by the Fifth Michigan in front, and the Thirty-seventh
New York at the left, the men pushing up to the pits near enough to
bayonet the riflemen behind them. By this charge considerable loss was
occasioned on both sides.

When General Kearney’s troops were coming into action, they met the
lengthened files of General Hooker’s wounded being carried to the rear.
The shrieks of the lacerated and bleeding soldiers, who had been
fighting so long and so well, pierced the air, and this, joined to the
mud and rain, and the exhaustion of those who had come several miles on
a forced march, was not calculated to produce a favorable impression on
them as they were going into action. General Heintzelman, however,
ordered several of the bands to strike up national and martial airs;
and, when the strains of these familiar tunes reached the ears of the
wounded, their cheers mingled with those of the soldiers who were just
rushing into the battle. The effect was wonderful on the other side; for
some of the prisoners state that when they heard the bands strike up the
Star-Spangled Banner, followed by that enthusiastic cheer, they knew
that the victory would be ours.

The Third and Fourth Maine regiments having been detached from General
Birney’s brigade, and temporarily assigned to General Emory, General
Birney came forward with the two remaining regiments,—the Thirty-eighth
New York, Colonel J. H. Ward, and the Fortieth New York, Colonel Reilly.
These were deployed to the right of the Hampton road, and, like those
under General Berry on the left, relieved fragments of regiments which
had borne the brunt of the battle since its commencement. All this time
the rebel artillery was sending a rapid fire into the Federal ranks.

The Thirty-eighth New York regiment was ordered to charge down the road
and take the enemy’s rifle-pits in front by the flank. Colonel Ward led
seven companies of his regiment in this most brilliant and successful
charge. The other three companies, under Lieutenant-Colonel Strong, were
doing efficient service in an adjacent portion of the field.

The battle had now been raging uninterruptedly from an early hour in the
morning, and seemed at last to be checked by the heroic conduct and
successful charge of General Kearney’s troops. The extreme left was
still heavily pressed, however, by the obstinate force of the rebels in
that part of the line.

To General Hancock was intrusted the most dangerous, because the boldest
manœuvre of the day. He passed with his brigade—the Fifth Wisconsin,
Colonel Cobb; the Sixth Maine, Colonel Burnham; the Forty-ninth
Pennsylvania, Colonel Lowrie; the Seventh Maine, Colonel Mason, and the
Thirty-third New York, Colonel R. F. Taylor, supported by Lieutenant
Cowan’s and Captain Wheeler’s batteries—to the right, for a mile
parallel to the front, but completely hidden by the forest. Thence
across a fifty-acre heath edged with timber, north to the extreme left
of the enemy’s line of works. At this point the rebels had dammed a
creek which empties into York river, and straight across the narrow
causeway frowned an earthwork, which looked imposing as a castle from
its commanding position on the opposite hill.

General Hancock found this singular defence deserted, but it was with
caution his skirmishers ventured across the dam and planted the Federal
flag on the parapet, fifty feet above water mark. Then the whole force
went over at double-quick, turned to the left, and followed a narrow,
dangerous road, a gorge cut in the hill-side by the pond, till it
emerged in turn, from the east, on the open battle-field.

A splendid picture met the eye. Two miles distant Hooker was fighting
the rebels on the other side of Fort Page. From the latter point the
rebel artillery was playing upon his lines. Between Hancock and the fort
were two lesser works, at intervals of half a mile. Their garrisons
quickly retreated on seeing him, and retired on the main force—the
movement before practiced on the left, and one which plainly indicated
that the rebel force was too small to hold the line. But it was also
evident, from the determined stand made in and near Fort Page, that the
rear guard was under orders to make a desperate maintenance of its
position.

Although Hancock had a regiment with him besides his own, yet his force
was scarcely five thousand, all told, and totally separated from the
main body. If overpowered in front, retreat would be utterly impossible
through the narrow gorge behind them. General Keyes appeared on the
field at this moment, and told General Hancock that he did not visit him
to assume the command as ranking officer, but to see him, Hancock,
“carry the left.” General Keyes at once sent back for a support of
cavalry and artillery. This was about one o’clock in the afternoon. For
some reason, General Sumner omitted ordering the reinforcements forward.

A regiment was soon in the enemy’s deserted works (No. 3 from York
river). The old flag was raised with wild cheers from its parapet; and
eight cannon were quickly unlimbered in the field beyond. A smaller,
intermediate outwork was still held between this and Fort Magruder. In
front of it a line of rebel skirmishers deployed, but were quickly
dispersed and forced to retire. In five minutes the Union guns were
playing, some on the great fort at six hundred yards distance, the rest
on the woods to the north, through which the rebels were retreating on
their main body.

Just then the clouds broke away in the west, and a flood of light came
in upon the whole panorama. Nothing could be more beautiful and
inspiriting. The deserted rebel forts, surmounted with Federal colors;
Hancock’s infantry awaiting orders in battle line; a signal officer
waving to the centre his flag-signals from the parapet of work No. 3;
the long fire-belching, smoke-canopied curve of Fort Page in the
distance; still further beyond, white flashes, and huge clouds of smoke
appearing from Hooker’s battle-ground on the left, of whose desperate
contest the stunning roll of musketry and roar of cannon gave true
token—all these combined formed a broad battle-picture worthy of Varney.

Wheeler’s artillery fired with precision and rapidity for an hour, the
fort answering gun for gun. But the rebel infantry seemed to have their
hands full in managing Hooker, and as it was not yet practicable to
storm the fort, the Union forces found little to do, and stood under
fire of the artillery with small loss, awaiting a share in the business.
It was not long in coming, and came in the shape which more than one
observer had feared from the outset. It was preceded at four o’clock by
one of those dead, ominous half hour pauses which so often make the
decisive turn of an engagement. Many thought the enemy were retreating.
Others, who have had occasion to dread these still and awful lapses from
the bloody work of a field-day, prognosticated an unknown danger
impending close at hand.

Suddenly there burst from the woods on the right flank a battalion of
rebel cavalry! Then, to the right and left of the horse, three regiments
of infantry supporting it!

But General Hancock was equal to the crisis. Forming his infantry
against this sudden attack, he held them in magnificent order, while the
rebel foot and horse came on, cheering, firing, and charging in gallant
and imposing style. Wheeler’s battery turned and poured hot volleys into
them as they came, and over five thousand muskets riddled them through
and through. But they kept on—nearer—nearer—closing up, cheering, and
sure of their power to sweep the Federals before them.

[Illustration: [Battle]]

Thus they came, swifter than it can be told, until their line, now
broken and irregular, was within two hundred yards of the unwavering
columns. Then Hancock showed himself the coolest and bravest of the
brave. Taking off his hat, and using the courtly prefix of the olden
time, he said: “_Ready, now! Gentlemen_, CHARGE!” The whole line swept
forward, as the reaper’s sickle rushes through the grain. Its keen edge
had not yet touched the enemy, when his ranks broke simultaneously, fled
in confusion to the rear, and the field of Williamsburg was won.

About five o’clock P. M. some excitement was caused in the rear, and
soon an officer, with his staff, rode to the opening in the woods where
he could get a view of the field. It was General McClellan. The moment
he was seen, loud and deafening cheers rose up along the lines of the
centre, and rolled away to the right and left, imparting a new
enthusiasm to the forces. The chief officers were quickly consulted, and
reinforcements were sent to the aid of Hancock and Hooker. Hancock’s
brilliant and successful charge had already won the day on the right,
and the effect of it in the panic and rout of the rebels was becoming
sensibly felt in front of Hooker’s division, when the long-looked for
assistance came to his side. The rebels promptly retired, and the
desperate struggle of the day closed on a splendidly contested field.
The men were compelled to bivouack on the ground, with the rain still
falling, in proud anticipation of a renewal of the conflict in the
morning.

The rebels had been reinforced as late as five o’clock, and it was
expected that General Johnston would command them in the morning in
person, but the opportune appearance of the Federal reinforcements,
together with the successful movements of General Hancock, created a
panic among them, and they fell back on Williamsburg, and commenced
their hasty retreat from that place. At two o’clock on Tuesday morning
the Federal forces began to move. As they approached Williamsburg they
found the way clear, and on coming up to the city the rear guard of the
foe were flying on the road toward Richmond, leaving the town to be
occupied by the Federal troops. General McClellan appointed General
Jameson Military Governor of the place, and the troops marched through
the main street of the city to the homely, but glorious and
soul-stirring strains of “Yankee Doodle.”

The houses, churches, barns and stables were found filled with the
wounded of the rebel army, as well as the Federals whom they had taken
prisoners. It was a sad, heart-rending scene, those brave soldiers
mangled, dying and dead. The Federal troops immediately commenced the
work of burial, while the surgeons found incessant occupation in the
discharge of their duties. The battle field presented a frightful scene
of carnage, and several days passed before all the dead and wounded
stragglers were found in the woods and among the underbrush where they
had fallen.

The loss of the Federals was about 500 killed, 1,600 wounded, and 623
prisoners. That of the rebels was somewhat greater in killed and
wounded. Five hundred prisoners fell into Federal hands. Some hundred of
the rebel dead were buried on the day following the battle.
Lieutenant-Colonel Irwin, of the Eighth Alabama, formerly United States
Senator, was found dead on the field.

Thirty-five regiments of the rebels were engaged in the action, that
number being represented by the wounded men left after the battle.




                       BATTLE OF WEST POINT, VA.

                              MAY 7, 1862.


West Point is the name given to the landing-place at the head of the
York river, which is formed by the junction of the Pamunkey and
Mattapony rivers, and is thirty miles above Yorktown.

After the evacuation of that place, and the entrance of the Federal
troops, the Union army proceeded in its advance toward Richmond by
different routes, as already detailed. One column marched by the land
route, under Heintzelman, Sumner, Hooker, Kearney and Keyes, while
General Franklin led his corps by transports up the York river to West
Point, leaving Yorktown at nine o’clock, on Tuesday morning, May 6th.
The banks of the river presented a fine appearance, and white flags were
displayed from many of the houses. The house of Mr. Bigler, a firm
loyalist, was almost covered with an immense flag, bearing the stars and
stripes, while one of the ladies of the house waved the beautiful emblem
of peace along its folds, from one of the windows. The rebels had set
fire to a valuable mill belonging to Mr. Bigler, and its ruins were
still sending up great clouds of smoke into the air, a lurid witness of
the destruction which had marked their progress. The army arrived at
West Point about two o’clock, P. M., and commenced its disembarkation.

In consequence of the shallowness of the approach by water, it became
necessary to use pontoon boats and scows to facilitate the landing.
Operations were therefore slow; but the troops were landed by midnight.
The rebels did not dispute the landing. Pickets were immediately thrown
out into the woods in front, the roads leading to the landing-place
examined, and trees were thrown across the roads. The pickets were
occasionally engaged during the night, but only two or three of the
Federals were lost in these irregular skirmishes. The night was spent in
active labors and in jealously watching the movements of the foe.

At half-past three o’clock the next morning, the whole division was
under arms. At six o’clock information that the enemy was approaching
was received, and the troops prepared at once to meet him. The Gosline
Zouaves, (Pennsylvania,) New York Sixteenth, Eighteenth, Thirty-first
and Thirty-second, and Maine Fifth were ordered to take the advance; the
New Jersey brigade following them up as a reserve. The Fourth New Jersey
having in its front a marsh, and immediately on its far side a piece of
woods, from which the enemy could fire upon it with advantage, Colonel
Simpson ordered his fine body of pioneers to throw a bridge over the
creek. This was the work of a few moments, and his regiment, by
direction of Colonel Taylor, took possession of the woods, and were
strongly posted behind a ravine, ready to deliver a telling fire upon
the rebels, in the contingency of the Fifth Maine, immediately in front,
being driven back. This contingency, however, did not occur.

The Thirty-second New York, Colonel Matteson, of Newton’s brigade, was
directed to clear the wood of rebels, who had made their presence known
to the pickets. The Sixteenth New York was ordered to the same work in
other portions of the wood. The Thirty-second proceeded to execute their
duty. Entering the wood they came upon a ravine, at the bottom of which
they were fired upon by the rebel skirmishers. They charged at once,
delivering a galling fire upon the enemy’s position. The enemy retired,
the troops following until a second ravine appeared in view. In
attempting to cross this the rebels from the other side again poured a
volley into them with considerable effect. They had not, however, the
power to drive back the Federal troops, who gallantly pursued the
rebels, delivering their fire upon them, or rather upon their position,
for they kept themselves adroitly concealed by the woods. At a third and
last ravine, the rebels had erected a breastwork on the opposite side,
from which they opened on the Federals with small arms, and grape and
canister from mountain howitzers. The Thirty-second charged gallantly up
to within a few feet of the work, but were forced to fall back from the
superior force of the enemy. They retired in admirable order. There were
only seven companies of the Thirty-second regiment engaged against
Alabama, Texas, South Carolina and Tennessee troops.

At two o’clock, P. M., the gunboats, three in number, opened fire upon
the enemy from their large guns, the shells apparently taking effect in
the right quarter, for the enemy soon afterwards retired, their battery
being silenced on the first shot from the boats. The enemy’s retreat
could be traced by the line of smoke in his rear. The retreating rebels
were evidently attempting to destroy every thing on their route. The
Sixteenth and Thirty-first regiments, New York Volunteers, were also
engaged with the enemy in the woods. The loss of the Thirty-second
regiment New York Volunteers was nearly one hundred in killed and
wounded. Three officers,—Captain Young, of company D; Captain Brown, of
company C, and Lieutenant Wallace, of company G—were killed, and
Lieutenant Stone, of company B, and Lieutenant Twaddle, of company F,
wounded severely, and thirteen privates were killed. The total loss in
the different regiments of Newton’s brigade was about two hundred in
killed, wounded and missing. The loss of the rebels was heavy, as was
presumed from the fact that they were seen from the transports carrying
off their dead and wounded in great numbers.

Most of the Federal regiments that took part in this engagement suffered
severely, and many prisoners were taken by the rebels. The timely
service rendered by the gunboats was mainly instrumental in defeating
the enemy.

Captain Montgomery, of General Newton’s staff, had a most extraordinary
escape from the Hampton Legion, into whose picket lines he became
entrapped. Captain Montgomery knew that only the utmost self-possession
could extricate him from his difficulty, and he coolly saluted them.
They supposed he was a rebel officer, and asked him how far General
Hampton was from them. Montgomery told them he had left him about ten
rods distant, and said, “Now, boys, the General expects you to do your
duty to-day!” and turned his horse slowly around to retire. But the
rebels saw the “U. S.” on his cap, and immediately sprang to their feet,
while the Captain was dashing with all the speed of his horse down the
road. But too late. A volley of minie rifle balls whistled round him,
and his horse fell dead, pierced by seven balls. He fell upon Captain
Montgomery’s leg, giving him several severe bruises. The Captain fell
back, with his head in a ditch, where he lay some ten minutes,
pretending to be dead. The rebels came up to him, talking, swearing, and
making their comments on the Yankee, while they rifled his pockets.

The brave fellow lay perfectly still, holding his breath, while these
rude men were searching his person; but a sense of his ludicrous
position came upon him too strongly, and he burst into a hearty fit of
laughter, much to the astonishment of those who believed themselves to
be pillaging a dead body.

Of course, there was no avoiding his fate now, and he surrendered
himself a prisoner of war, with the merry laughter still bright upon his
face. His captors were greatly annoyed by his coolness and his
“shamming,” and were leading him off to headquarters, when a couple of
shells came whizzing through the air and exploding in their midst,
dispersed them. Captain Montgomery seized the opportunity, and plunging
into the woods found his way to the Federal lines, where, after a little
rest, he mounted another horse and joined the fight again.




                              CHRONOLOGY.


  =1860.=

=Nov. 8.= The election of Abraham Lincoln and Hannibal Hamlin, as
President and Vice President of the United States, was announced at
Washington.

9–11. James Chesnut, Jr., and James H. Hammond, U. S. Senators from
South Carolina, resigned their seats in the Senate.

=Dec. 3.= The Second Session of the 36th Congress opened at Washington.

10. U. S. House of Representatives appointed a Committee of 33 on the
State of the Union.

10. Howell Cobb, of Georgia, Secretary of the U. S. Treasury, resigned
his office. John A. Dix, of New York, was appointed his successor.

14. Lewis Cass, of Michigan, Secretary of State, resigned.

17. Meeting of the South Carolina State Convention at Columbus, and
adjournment to Charleston.

20. The South Carolina “Ordinance of Secession” passed.

23. Discovery of a large embezzlement of the Indian Trust Funds, in
charge of Jacob Thompson, Secretary of the Department of the Interior.

24. Resignation of the South Carolina Representatives in Congress.

25. Intervention of citizens of Pittsburgh, Pa., to prevent the removal
to the South of ordnance in Alleghany Arsenal.

26. Major Anderson removed his command from Fort Moultrie to Fort
Sumter.

26. Messrs. Barnwell, Orr, and Adams, Commissioners appointed by South
Carolina to treat with the Federal Government, arrived at Washington.

27. Captain N. L. Coste, U.S.R. service, in command of the cutter
William Aiken, betrayed his vessel into the hands of the State
authorities of South Carolina.

28. The palmetto flag was raised over the custom house and post-office
in Charleston, S. C., and Castle Pinckney and Fort Moultrie were
occupied by the South Carolina military.

28. Enthusiastic Union meeting at Memphis, Tenn.

28. Twenty-one guns were fired at Wilmington, Del., in honor of Major
Anderson and his men.

29. John B. Floyd resigned his position as Secretary of War.

30. South Carolina troops took possession of the U.S. Arsenal at
Charleston, containing many thousand stand of arms and valuable military
stores.


  =1861.=

=Jan. 2.= Gov. Ellis, of North Carolina, dispatched troops to seize Fort
Macon, the forts at Wilmington, and the U.S. Arsenal at Fayetteville.

3. Fort Pulaski, at Savannah, Ga., taken possession of by Georgia
troops, by order of the Governor.

3. South Carolina Commissioners left Washington for Charleston, the
President declining to receive any official communication from them.

4. United States Arsenal at Mobile seized by secessionists. No defence.

4. Fast day, by proclamation of President Buchanan.

4. Fort Morgan, at the entrance of Mobile Bay, taken and garrisoned by
200 Alabama troops.

5. Steamship Star of the West sailed from New York with troops and
provisions for Fort Sumter.

7. Meeting of Alabama State Convention.

7. Meeting of Mississippi State Convention.

7. Meeting of Virginia Legislature.

7. Meeting of Tennessee Legislature.

8. Jacob Thompson resigned his place in the Cabinet, as Secretary of the
Interior.

8. United States sub-Treasury at Charleston seized.

9. Mississippi Ordinance of Secession passed.

9. Steamship Star of the West, with supplies for Fort Sumter, fired into
from Morris’ Island and Fort Moultrie, and driven from Charleston
harbor.

11. Louisiana State troops, under Captain Bradford, took possession of
the U.S. marine hospital, two miles below New Orleans, and ordered the
removal of the patients, 216 in number.

11. Florida Convention adopted an Ordinance of Secession by a vote of 62
to 7.

11. Alabama Convention adopted an Ordinance of Secession by a vote of 61
to 39.

11. Abolition meeting at Rochester, N. Y., broken up by a mob.

12. Senator Seward’s great Union speech in the U.S. Senate.

12. Fort Barrancas and the Navy Yard at Pensacola, Fla., seized by rebel
troops.

15. Col. Hayne, Commissioner from South Carolina to Washington, demanded
the withdrawal of the garrison of Fort Sumter.

15. U. S. coast survey schooner Dana seized by Florida State
authorities.

18. Massachusetts Legislature unanimously tendered to the President of
the U.S. such aid in men and money as he might request to maintain the
authority of the general government.

19. Convention of Georgia adopted a secession ordinance by a vote of 208
to 89.

21. Jefferson Davis, of Mississippi, withdrew from U.S. Senate.

24. U. S. arsenal at Augusta, Ga., surrendered to the State authorities.

26. Louisiana Convention passed an ordinance of secession by a vote of
113 to 17. The popular vote afterwards taken was 20,448 for; 17,296
against.

29. U. S. revenue cutter Robert McClelland, Captain Breshwood,
surrendered to State of Louisiana.

29. Secretary Dix’s dispatch to Hemphill Jones at New Orleans, “If any
one attempts to haul down the American flag, shoot him on the spot.”

31. South Carolina authorities offered to buy Fort Sumter.

31. U. S. branch mint and custom house at New Orleans seized by State
authorities.

=Feb. 1.= Texas Convention at Galveston passed an ordinance of
secession, to be voted on by the people on the 23d of February, and to
take effect March 2.

1. U. S. revenue cutter Lewis Cass, Capt. Morrison, surrendered to the
State of Louisiana.

4. A convention of delegates from the seceded States organized at
Montgomery, Alabama; Howell Cobb, President, J. F. Hooper, Secretary.

5. Peace Convention at Washington organized; John Tyler, of Va.,
Chairman, J. C. Wright, of Ohio, Secretary.

8. Congress at Montgomery adopted a Constitution for a provisional
government, to go into immediate operation; Jefferson Davis, President,
Alex. H. Stephens, Vice President.

8. U. S. arsenal at Little Rock, Ark., with 9,000 stand of arms and 40
cannon, &c., was surrendered to State authorities.

13. The election of Lincoln and Hamlin, as President and V. President of
the U. S., formally declared in the Senate by John C. Breckinridge, V.
President.

18. Jefferson Davis inaugurated as President of the Southern
Confederacy.

22. John Ross, principal Cherokee Chief, rejected a proposition of Gov.
H. M. Rector, of Ark., to entice his nation to take part in the
rebellion.

23. Hon. Abraham Lincoln, President elect, arrived in Washington.

23. U. S. property to a great amount, together with the various army
posts in Texas, surrendered to the rebels by General Twiggs. Property
valued at $1,500,000, besides buildings.

27. Peace Convention, at Washington, submitted to the Senate a plan of
adjustment of the national difficulties, involving seven amendments to
the Constitution.

=March 1.= General Twiggs expelled from the army of the United States.

2. Revenue cutter Dodge seized in Galveston Bay by Texas authorities.

4. Abraham Lincoln inaugurated 16th President of the U. S., at
Washington.

4. A State Convention declared Texas out of the Union.

5. Gen. P. T. Beauregard took command of the forces investing Fort
Sumter, S. C.

6. Fort Brown, Texas, surrendered to State troops.

18. Supplies cut off from Fort Pickens and the Federal fleet in the Gulf
of Mexico, by rebel authorities at Pensacola.

20. Sloop Isabel, at Pensacola, with provision for the Federal fleet,
was seized by the rebels.

21. Great speech of A. H. Stephens, V. President of the Southern
Confederacy, at Savannah, Ga.

30. Mississippi State Convention ratified the Constitution of the C. S.,
by a vote of 78 to 7.

=April 3.= South Carolina Convention ratified the Constitution of the C.
S. by a vote of 114 to 16.

10. Militia organized in District of Columbia for defence of the
capital.

11. Steamship Coatzacoalcos arrived in N. York, bringing Federal troops
from Texas.

11. Confederate States Commissioners left Washington.

12. Attack on Fort Sumter.

12. Reinforcement of Fort Pickens.

14. Evacuation of Fort Sumter.

15. Seventeen vessels from Southern ports, without U. S. clearances,
were seized at New York and fined $100 each.

15. President’s proclamation, calling for 75,000 volunteers to suppress
insurrection, and also calling an extra session of U. S. Congress on
July 4.

16. The government of the Southern Confederacy called for 32,000 men.

16. New York Legislature appropriated $3,000,000 for war purposes.

16. At New York, Philadelphia, Trenton and other places, journals were
compelled to display the American flag.

17. State Convention of Va., in secret session, passed an ordinance of
secession.

18. 500 volunteers from Pennsylvania, and 300 regulars, arrived at
Washington.

18. Lieut. Jones, in charge of Harper’s Ferry arsenal, hearing of the
advance of a large Virginia force to seize the establishment, set fire
to it, and retreated to Carlisle, Pa.

18. Great Union meeting at Wheeling, Va.

19. Seizure of the U. S. transport Star of the West, at Indianola, by
Texas troops under Col. Van Dorn.

19. Sixth Massachusetts regiment on its way to Washington, attacked by a
mob in Baltimore, and 3 killed and 7 wounded. In defending themselves, 7
rebels were killed and 8 wounded.

19. The N. Y. 7th militia, Mass. 4th and 8th militia, and R. I.
Providence Artillery left New York on their way to Washington.

19. Clearances refused to vessels in northern ports to ports south of
Maryland.

20. Eighth Mass. regiment reached Annapolis, Md.

20. Great Union mass meeting of citizens in Union Square, N. Y.

20. 600 kegs of gunpowder, destined for New Orleans, seized by the U. S.
Marshal at New York.

20. Fourth Mass. regiment landed at Fortress Monroe.

20. U. S. arsenal at Liberty, Mo., seized.

20. Steamship Star of the West, having been seized by secessionists, was
taken into New Orleans.

20. The ports of South Carolina, Georgia, Alabama, Florida, Mississippi,
Louisiana, and Texas, ordered to be blockaded by the President, as those
States were in a state of insurrection against the government.

20. Bridges on Pennsylvania Northern and Philadelphia railway, near
Baltimore, burned by a mob from that city.

21. Gosport Navy Yard, opposite Norfolk, Va., set on fire, and vessels
scuttled and sunk, by U. S. officers in charge, to prevent their seizure
by the rebels.

21. Branch Mint of the U. S. at Charlotte, N. C., seized by order of the
Governor of that State.

21. Philadelphia and Baltimore railway taken possession of by U.S.
government.

21. The N. Y. 6th, 12th, and 71st, and one R. I. and one Mass. regiment,
with a battery, left New York on transports for the Chesapeake.

21. Fourth Mass. regiment arrived at Fortress Monroe.

21. Andrew Johnson, U. S. Senator from Tennessee, mobbed at Lynchburg,
Va.

22. U. S. arsenal at Fayetteville, N. C., containing 37,000 stand of
arms, 3,000 kegs of powder, and a large quantity of shot and shell,
seized by State authority.

22. Depot of U. S. stores at Napoleon, Ark., seized under orders of
Henry M. Rector, Governor of that State.

22. 3,200 Pennsylvania troops at Cockeysville, 14 miles from Baltimore.

22. Seventh N. Y. regiment land at Annapolis, Md.

22. Embargo laid, by the Mayor and Police Board of Baltimore, on
provisions and steamboats, thus withholding the government stores in
that city.

23. N. Y. 8th, 13th, 28th, and 69th regiments embarked for Washington.

23. First South Carolina regiment left Charleston for the Potomac.

24. Fort Smith, Ark., seized by a rebel force under Col. Borland.

24. N. Y. 7th and Mass. 8th arrived in Washington.

25. A large amount of arms removed to Alton, Ill., from St. Louis
arsenal, by Illinois volunteers, to prevent their seizure by rebels.

25. Col. Van Dorn, of Texas State troops, captured 450 U. S. troops at
Saluria.

25. Transport Empire City, from Texas, arrived in N. Y. with 600 men of
the 3d Infantry and 2d Cavalry, U.S.A., from that State.

25. Gov. Letcher, of Va., by proclamation, transferred that Commonwealth
to the Southern Confederacy.

26. Gov. Brown, of Georgia, by proclamation, prohibited the payment of
all debts to Northern creditors till the end of hostilities.

26. Bridges over Gunpowder Creek, on Philadelphia and Baltimore railway,
and bridge over Bush river, on the same route, destroyed by the rebels.

26. Gov. Burton, of Delaware, issued a proclamation calling for
volunteers to defend the Union.

27. Military Department of Washington assigned to Col. Mansfield;
Department of Annapolis to Gen. Butler; Department of Pennsylvania to
Maj.-Gen. Patterson.

27. Five men arrested at the Navy Yard, Washington, for filling
bombshells with sand and sawdust.

27. A number of Southerners employed in the Departments at Washington,
refused the oath of allegiance prescribed by the Government, and
resigned.

27. The ports of Virginia and North Carolina were included in the
blockade by the President.

28. U. S. frigate Constitution arrived at New York from Annapolis.

29. Secession defeated in Maryland House of Delegates by a vote of 53 to
13.

29. Ellsworth’s Fire Zouaves left New York for Annapolis.

29. Daily communication between Baltimore and Philadelphia
re-established.

=May 1.= Brig.-Gen. Harney addressed a strong Union letter to his
friends in Missouri.

2. N. Y. 69th (Irish) regiment arrived at Washington.

2. Col. F. P. Blair, Jr., announced that the four regiments called for
from the State of Missouri, by the President, were enrolled, armed, and
mustered into the service within one week from the call.

3. Gov. Jackson, of Missouri, in a message to the Legislature,
recommended arming the State, and a union of sympathy and destiny with
the slaveholding States.

3. Four New Jersey regiments, fully equipped, under General Runyon,
started for the seat of war.

3. President Lincoln issued a proclamation calling into service 42,000
volunteers for three years, and directing the increase of the regular
army and navy of the United States.

3. Privateer Savannah captured by the U. S. brig Perry.

4. Steamship Star of the West was put into commission as the receiving
ship of the Confederate navy, at New Orleans.

5. Brig.-Gen. Butler, with 6th Massachusetts and 8th New York regiments,
took possession of the Relay House, at the junction of the Baltimore,
Washington and Ohio railways, nine miles south of Baltimore.

6. The six regiments called for from Indiana, were mustered into service
in one week from date of the call.

6. Virginia admitted into the Southern Confederacy in secret session of
Confederate Congress.

6. Police Commissioners of St. Louis, Mo., demanded of Capt. Lyon the
removal of U. S. troops from all places and buildings occupied by them
in that city outside the Arsenal grounds.

6. City military of Baltimore disbanded by order of Major Trimble,
commander.

6. Confederate States Congress recognized war with United States, and
authorized issue of letters of marque and reprisal.

6. Legislature of Arkansas passed an unconditional ordinance of
secession, 69 to 1.

7. Major Anderson, with consent of Sec. of War, accepted command of
Kentucky state military.

7. Serious riot at Knoxville, Tenn., caused by hoisting a Union flag.

7. League between Tennessee authorities and Confederate States.

7. The late U. S. garrison of Fort Davis, Texas, consisting of 11
officers and 300 men, made prisoners of war by a force of 1,800 rebels
near Eastonville. They all refused to enlist in the rebel army.

9. U. S. troops landed at Locust Point, in Baltimore, and were conveyed
by the Balt. and Ohio branch railroad through the city.

9. The Confederate Congress authorized President Davis to raise such
force for the war as he should deem expedient.

9. U. S. ships Cumberland, Pawnee, Monticello and Yankee enforcing the
blockade off Fortress Monroe.

9. Steamers Philadelphia, Baltimore, Powhatan and Mount Vernon, armed by
U. S. Government, and cruising on the Potomac.

9. Virginians have batteries in Norfolk harbor, at Craney Island, Sandy
Point, the Hospital, Fort Norfolk, and the Bluffs, three miles from the
Hospital.

10. Maj.-Gen. R. E. Lee appointed to command the rebel forces in
Virginia.

10. Maj.-Gen. McClellan appointed to command the Department of Ohio.

10. The President directed that all officers in the army should take
anew the oath of allegiance to the United States.

10. The secession military, under Gen. Frost, at St. Louis, Mo.,
surrendered to Capt. Lyon, commanding U. S. forces. A mob assailed the
U. S. military after the surrender, and were fired on by them, and many
killed and wounded.

10. The Winans steam gun captured by Gen. Butler, three miles from the
Relay House, Md.

10. The Maryland Legislature passed a resolution imploring the President
of the United States to cease the present war.

11. U. S. steam frigate Niagara off Charleston, S. C., and began the
blockade of that port.

11. Gen. Harney issued a proclamation exhorting the people of Missouri,
to maintain peace, and announced his determination to use the authority
of the Government for that purpose.

11. A company of Home Guards, at St. Louis, Mo., mostly German, were
fired on by a mob, and returned the fire. Three of the Guards and 4 of
the citizens were killed.

13. The 6th Mass. and 8th N. Y. regiments, under Gen. Butler, occupied
Federal Hill, near Baltimore.

13. Convention of Union delegates from 35 counties in W. Virginia, met
in Wheeling.

13. A lady from New Haven, Conn., teacher of a Grammar School in New
Orleans, denuded, tarred and feathered in Lafayette Square, amid an
immense crowd of people, being accused of expressing abolition
sentiments.

14. Gov. Hicks, of Maryland, issued a proclamation, calling for four
regiments of troops, to serve within Maryland, or for the defence of the
capital of the United States.

14. Gen. Butler seized a large quantity of arms stored in Baltimore, and
a schooner loaded with arms.

15. A proclamation of neutrality with respect to the civil war in the U.
S. was issued by Queen Victoria, in which the subjects of Great Britain
were forbidden to take part in the contest, or endeavor to break a
blockade “lawfully and effectually established.”

15. The town of Potosi, Washington co., Mo., taken possession of by U.
S. troops, and rebel prisoners and munitions of war taken to St. Louis.

16. Gen. Butler appointed Maj.-Gen. of Volunteers.

18. Arkansas admitted to the Southern Confederacy.

18. Military Department of Virginia organized, embracing E. Virginia, N.
Carolina and Tennessee, Maj.-Gen. Butler in command.

18. John Ross, principal Cherokee Chief, in two admirable letters
rejects the efforts of the rebels in Arkansas to draw his nation into
rebellion.

19. Shots exchanged between U. S. steamers Freeborn and Monticello, and
the rebel battery at Sewall’s Point, Va.

19. Eight thousand rebel troops at Harper’s Ferry.

20. Death of Col. Vosburgh, N. Y. 71st, at Washington.

20. Seizure by the Government of principal telegraph offices throughout
the free States, and of the accumulated dispatches for twelve months.

20. Ordinance of secession, and ordinance assenting to the Confederate
Constitution passed by North Carolina State Convention.

20. Seizure of 1,600 muskets and 4,000 pikes by Federal troops in
Baltimore.

20. Gen. Cadwallader, successor to Gen. Butler, occupied Federal Hill,
Baltimore.

20. Fort McHenry reinforced.

20. Prize ship Gen. Parkhill, of Liverpool, arrived at Philadelphia,
with a crew from the frigate Niagara.

21. Confederate Congress at Montgomery adjourned to meet at Richmond,
July 20.

22. Erection of rebel batteries at Aquia Creek.

22. Maj. Gen. Butler arrived at Fortress Monroe.

22. Fort at Ship Island, Miss., destroyed to prevent its falling into
rebel hands.

22. Steamer J. C. Swan, 30 miles below St. Louis, seized by order of
Gen. Lyon.

22. Five thousand pounds of lead seized at Ironton, Mo., _en route_ for
the South.

23. Strong secession speech by A. H. Stephens, at Atlanta, Ga.

23. A battery of Whitworth guns, 12-pounders, arrived in N. Y. city, a
present to the Government from patriotic Americans abroad.

23. At Clarksburgh, Harrison co., Va., two companies of secession troops
surrendered their arms and dispersed at the demand of Union companies
under Capts. Moore and Vance.

24. All vessels from the Northern States at New Orleans, which arrived
after the 6th inst., were seized by the Confederate States Marshal.

24. Jeff. Davis appointed the 13th of June to be observed as a day of
fasting and prayer.

24. Thirteen thousand Union troops crossed the Potomac and entered
Virginia, occupying Alexandria and Arlington Heights.

24. Assassination of Col. Ellsworth, at Alexandria, Va.

25. Destruction of seven bridges and five miles of rails from Alexandria
to Leesburg, Va., by the 69th N. Y. S. M.

26. Confederate privateer Calhoun arrived at New Orleans with three
whaling vessels and cargoes as prizes.

26. Arrival of 600 U. S. troops at Havana, from Texas.

27. A writ of _habeas corpus_ was issued at Baltimore, Md., by
Chief-Justice Taney, in the case of John Merryman. Gen. Cadwallader
declined surrendering him, and an attachment was issued for the
General’s arrest, which was not served.

27. U. S. steamer Brooklyn commenced the blockade of the Mississippi
river.

27. Brig.-Gen. McDowell took command of the Federal forces in Virginia.

27. The blockade of Mobile, Ala., commenced.

28. Blockade of Savannah initiated by U. S. gunboat Union.

28. The rebels erected barricades at Harper’s Ferry and Point of Rocks;
Manassas Junction fortified.

28. Strength of the Rebels in Virginia reported at 90,000 men.

28. Jeff. Davis arrived at Richmond.

28. Services of Miss D. L. Dix accepted by the War Department, for
organizing military hospitals, and procuring nurses.

29. Advance of Ohio and Pennsylvania troops through Maryland, towards
Harper’s Ferry; rebels fall back to Martinsburg.

29. Federal troops occupied Grafton, Va.

30. Concentration of Federal troops at Chambersburg, Pa.

31. Steamers Freeborn and Anacosta attacked rebel batteries at Aquia
Creek, Va.

31. Gen. Harney superseded by Gen. Lyon in Missouri.

31. Gens. Banks and Fremont commissioned as Major-Generals.

31. Ex-Gov. Pratt of Maryland, arrested and taken to Washington Navy
Yard.

=June 1.= British Government prohibited U. S. and rebel armed vessels
from bringing any prizes to British ports.

1. Charge of U. S. cavalry at Fairfax Court House, Va., Lieut. Tompkins,
commanding.

2. Federal batteries erected at the Rip Raps, near Fortress Monroe.

2. Gen. Twiggs appointed Maj.-Gen. Confederate army.

3. Gen. Beauregard took command of the rebel forces at Manassas
Junction.

3. Surprise of rebel troops at Philippi, Va., by U. S. forces under
Cols. Dumont, Kelly and Lander. Col. Kelly was severely wounded.

3. Hon. Stephen A. Douglas died at Chicago. His dying message to his
sons was, “Tell them to obey the laws and support the Constitution of
the United States.”

3. Border State Convention met at Frankfort, Ky.

4. Chief-Justice Taney’s protest published against the suspension of the
_habeas corpus_ by the President.

5. Gun factory and arms of Merrill and Thomas, Baltimore, seized by U.
S. Government.

6. Gov. Pickens, of S. C., forbade the remittance of funds to Northern
creditors.

6. Thirty-five Virginia cavalry were captured at Alexandria. They took
the oath of allegiance and were released.

6. Treasonable dispatches to the rebel Government discovered in the
telegraph office at Washington, from Jas. E. Harvey, appointed minister
to Portugal.

6. Secession camp at Ellicott’s Mills, Ky., ten miles from Cairo, broken
up by troops sent from latter station by Gen. Prentiss.

8. Bridges at Point of Rocks and Berlin, on the Potomac river, burned by
order of rebel Gen. Johnston.

8. Sanitary Commission authorized and appointed by the Government.

8. Four bridges on the Alexandria and Hampshire railway, Va., burned by
disunion troops.

8. Gen. Patterson’s troops marched from Chambersburg towards Harper’s
Ferry.

8. Seizure of arms at Easton, Md., by U. S. troops from Annapolis.

8. Vote of Tennessee reported in favor of secession.

10. Gen. Banks assumed command in Baltimore.

10. Gov. Harris, of Tenn., authorized the raising of troops for the
rebel army.

10. Repulse of Federal troops at Great Bethel, near Fortress Monroe.

11. Surprise and rout of armed rebels at Romney, Va., by Col. Wallace’s
Indiana regiment.

12. Gov. Jackson, of Missouri, issued a proclamation calling 50,000
State militia into service, to protect the “lives, liberty and property
of the citizens of the State.”

12. Meeting of W. Virginia State Convention at Wheeling. They resolved
to elect loyal State officers.

13. Fast day in seceded States, by order of Pres. Davis.

13. Skirmish at Seneca Mills, on the Potomac, 28 miles above Washington,
between U. S. District Volunteers and rebel cavalry.

14. Gen. J. A. Dix, of New York, appointed Maj.-Gen. of U. S.
Volunteers.

14. Harper’s Ferry evacuated by the rebel forces, who destroyed all the
available property.

14. Flight of Gov. Jackson and Gen. Price from Jefferson City, capital
of Missouri. The telegraph lines and bridges destroyed by them on their
route to Booneville.

14. The great Union gun arrived at Fortress Monroe.

14. Miss Dix and a number of nurses arrived at Fortress Monroe.

14. Maryland election resulted in the triumph of all the Union
candidates but Winter Davis.

15. Mr. Woodall, of Baltimore, hung by rebels at Harper’s Ferry.

15. Jefferson City, Mo., occupied by U.S. troops, under Gen. Lyon.

16. Skirmish at Seneca Mills, Md. Rebel captain and 2 men killed by
Major Everett’s command.

17. Skirmish at Edward’s Ferry, on the Potomac, between the 1st
Pennsylvania regiment and a body of rebels.

17. Six persons killed in St. Louis, by soldiers of Col. Kallman’s
regiment discharging a volley at the Recorder’s Court-building, in
retaliation of a shot fired into their ranks.

17. Surprise at Vienna, Va. First Ohio regiment fired into by a masked
battery, 8 killed, 6 wounded.

17. Western Virginia Convention unanimously declared their independence
of the eastern section of the State.

17. Rebel forces at Booneville, Mo., defeated by Gen. Lyon. 35 rebels
killed or wounded, and 30 prisoners. Federal loss, 2 killed and 8
wounded. A large quantity of arms and camp equipage captured.

17. Gov. Hicks, of Md., in a message repelled the attempt of the
Legislature to search his executive records for supposed correspondence
with the Government.

18. U.S. troops at Hagerstown and Williamsport, Md., crossed the
Potomac, under command of Gen. Patterson.

18. First balloon ascension for U.S. military purposes, by Prof. Lowe,
at Washington.

18. Surprise of 800 Union Home Guards under Capt. Cook, at Camp Cole,
Mo., by rebels from Warsaw. 25 killed, 52 wounded, 23 prisoners: 45 of
the enemy killed or wounded.

18. Thirty-five rebels, with arms and ammunition, captured at Liberty,
Mo., by U.S. regulars from Kansas City.

18. Railway bridge over New Creek, Va., burned by rebels from Romney.

20. Senator Lane, of Kansas, appointed brigadier-general.

20. Gen. McClellan took command of the Federal army in Western Virginia.

20. Cornelius Vanderbilt offered all the steamships of the Atlantic and
Pacific Steamship Company, for the service of the Government.

21. East Tennessee Union Convention held at Greenville.

22. The exequator of Mr. Trappman, Prussian Consul at Charleston,
revoked by the President, for complicity with the rebels.

23. Balloon observations by Prof. Lowe, at Falls Church, Va.

23. Forty-eight locomotives, and a large quantity of other railway
property of the Baltimore and Ohio railway, destroyed by rebels at
Martinsburgh, Va.

24. Great fire in Richmond, Va.

24. Riot in Milwaukee, Wis., occasioned by the banks refusing to receive
on deposit certain bills comprising an important part of the currency,
and their consequent depreciation.

24. Rebel batteries at Mathias Point, Va., shelled by U. S. steamers
Pawnee and Freeborn.

24. Engagement of U. S. steamer Monticello, with rebels, at Carter’s
Creek, Va.

24. Secession of Tennessee proclaimed by Gov. Harris. Vote, 104,913 for,
to 47,238 against.

25. Virginia vote announced to be 128,884 for, and 32,134 against
secession.

25. Western Virginia government recognized by the President.

26. Address of the Sanitary Commission to the citizens of the United
States.

26. Brilliant skirmish of Corp. Hayes and 12 men of Col. Wallace’s
Indiana regiment, scouting on Patterson Creek, Md.

27. John C. Fremont arrived at Boston from Liverpool, bringing a large
quantity of arms for the government.

27. Marshal Kane, of Baltimore, arrested by order of Gen. Banks, and
John R. Kenly appointed provost-marshal.

27. Engagement between gunboat Freeborn and rebel batteries at Mathias
Point. Captain Ward of the Freeborn killed.

27. Cols. Magruder and Hardee appointed brigadier-generals in
Confederate army.

27. East Tennessee Union Convention meet at Nashville. Hon. Thomas A. R.
Nelson presiding.

28. Skirmish at Shorter’s Hill, Virginia. Union loss, 1 killed and 1
wounded; rebel loss, 2 killed.

29. Steamer St. Nicholas and three brigs captured by secessionists on
the Chesapeake.

=July 1.= Gen. Banks arrested Messrs. Howard, Getchell, Hincks, and
Davis, late members of Police Board, Baltimore.

1. Skirmish at Farmington, Mo. A large body of rebels routed by 50 Home
Guards, under Capt. Cooke.

2. Rebels driven from Martinsburgh, Va., by Abercrombie’s brigade, Gen.
Patterson’s division. Union loss, 3 killed and 10 wounded; rebel loss,
30 killed and wounded, 20 prisoners.

2. Organization of Virginia Legislature, at Wheeling.

3. Gen. Lyon, with 2,000 Federal troops, left Booneville, Mo., for the
south-west.

3. Arkansas Military Board called out 10,000 men to repel invasion.

4. U. S. Congress met in special session.

4. Passenger trains on Louisville and Nashville railway seized by
rebels.

4. Skirmish at Harper’s Ferry between N.Y. 9th and rebels. Federal loss,
2 killed and 3 wounded.

4. Rebel battery erected at Mathias Point, Va.

4. Great Union meeting at San Francisco.

5. Battle at Carthage, Mo. Union forces, under Col. Sigel, 1,500;
rebels, 4,000. Union loss, 13 killed and 31 wounded; rebel loss, 250
killed and wounded. Successful retreat of Sigel.

5. Skirmish at Newport News, Va., between a detachment of Hawkins’
Zouaves and rebels.

4–7. U. S. steamer South Carolina captured or destroyed 11 vessels off
Galveston.

6. Western Military Department constituted: Illinois, and the States and
Territories west of the Mississippi to the Rocky Mountains, including
New Mexico. Maj.-Gen. Fremont commanding.

6. Skirmish of 45 men, 3d Ohio, at Middle Fork Bridge, 12 miles east of
Buckhannon, Va. 1 killed and 3 wounded of the Federals, and 7 rebels
killed and wounded.

7. “Infernal” machines detected floating in the Potomac.

7. Skirmish at Great Falls, Va. Major Gerhardt’s 8th German battalion
have 2 men killed. Several rebels killed.

7. Congressman Vallandigham assaulted in the camp of 2d Ohio regiment.

8. Telegraphic dispatches of military operations placed under
censorship.

8. Skirmish at Bealington, Western Va., 14th Ohio, and 7th and 9th
Indiana, and Col. Barnett’s 1st Ohio battery. Rebels defeated with loss
of 20 killed, 40 wounded; Union loss, 2 killed, 6 wounded.

10. Loan bill passed by House of Representatives, authorizing the
Secretary of the Treasury to borrow $250,000,000, redeemable in 20
years.

10. Postal service discontinued in Middle and West Tennessee.

10. Bill authorizing $500,000,000 and 500,000 volunteers, to suppress
the rebellion passed the Senate.

10. Gen. Banks appointed George R. Dodge police marshal of Baltimore,
_vice_ Col. Kenly, and removed all the military to positions in the
suburbs.

10. House of Representatives empowered the President to close the ports
of seceded States.

10. Skirmish at Monroe Station, Mo., between Federal troops, under Col.
Smith, and rebels, commanded by Gen. Harris. Rebels routed on the
following day, after they had burned 25 railway cars and station house,
by Union forces sent to relieve Col. Smith. Several Federals wounded;
rebel loss, 30 killed and wounded, and 70 prisoners.

10. Rebel General Wise issued a proclamation to citizens of Western Va.,
calling for volunteers, and offering pardon for past offences.

10. Skirmish at Laurel Hill, Va. Federal troops under Cols. McCook and
Andrews, rebels under Col. Pegram. Rebels defeated. Union loss 1 killed,
3 wounded.

11. Alex. H. Stephens’ speech, at Augusta, Ga., defending secession, and
soliciting contributions to aid the Confederacy.

11. The _State Journal_, at St. Louis, Mo., suppressed by Gen. Lyon for
disloyal sentiments.

11. Battle of Rich Mountain, Va. Defeat of the rebels under Col. Pegram,
60 killed, 150 wounded, and 150 prisoners. Capture of 200 tents, 60
wagons, 6 cannon, and other stores. Union loss 11 killed and 35 wounded.

12. Fight at Barboursville, Va. Six companies of Col. Woodruff’s 2d
Kentucky attack and defeat 600 rebels. 1 Kentuckian and 10 or 12 rebels
killed.

12. 600 rebels, under Col. Pegram, surrendered to Gen. McClellan, at
Beverly, Va.

12. Twelve of Col. Bendix’s N. Y. regiment captured at Newport News.

13. John B. Clark, of Mo., expelled from the House of Representatives,
having been found in arms against the Government.

13. Great Union speech of Joseph Holt, at Louisville, Ky.

13. Battle of Carrick’s Ford, Va., and death of Gen. Garnett, rebel
commander. Defeat and rout of the rebels, with a loss of 150 killed and
wounded, and 800 prisoners. Federal loss 13 killed, 40 wounded.

15. Skirmish at Bunker Hill, Va. Rout of rebel cavalry by fire of R. I.
battery. The rebels pursued by 2d U.S. cavalry.

15. Peace meeting at Nyack, N. Y.

16. Railway cars, containing Union troops, fired into at Millsville, Mo.
3 soldiers killed, 7 wounded; 7 rebels killed.

16. Federal army under Gen. McDowell marched toward Manassas.

16. Bill authorizing the President to call out militia to suppress the
rebellion, passed the House of Representatives, and the bill to accept
services of 500,000 volunteers.

16. Speech of J. C. Breckinridge in the Senate in opposition to the
Union Defence Bill.

16. Tilghman, a negro, killed 3 of a rebel prize crew on the schooner S.
J. Waring, and brought the vessel into N. York on the 22d.

17. Advance column of national army occupied Fairfax Court House, Va.

17. Battle at Scarytown, Va. Repulse of Federate with loss of 9 killed,
38 wounded, 9 missing. Rebel loss less. 3 Federal colonels and 2
captains captured.

17. Gen. Patterson’s army marched from Bunker Hill, Va., to Charlestown.

17. Skirmish at Fulton, Mo. Rebels driven back with loss.

18. Kansas City, Mo., Home Guards, under Major Van Horn, attacked near
Harrisonville by a superior force of rebels, whom they defeated, killing
and wounding 20. Union loss 1 killed.

18. Battle at Blackburn’s Ford. Attack on the rebel entrenchments at
Bull Run by a portion of Gen. Tyler’s Division, who were repulsed with a
loss of 83 men killed, wounded and missing. Rebel loss 68 killed and
wounded.

19. Six Federal officers, near Hampton, Va., fired on by rebels in
ambush. Major Rawlings killed, and Lieut. Johnson and Mr. Shurtliffe
wounded and captured.

19. By Gen. Order No. 46 of War Department, Maj.-Gen. Patterson was
honorably discharged, and Maj.-Gen. Banks appointed his successor in the
Department of the “Shenandoah,” and Gen. Dix appointed to succeed Gen.
Banks in the Department of Maryland.

19. The Captain-General of Cuba liberated all the vessels brought into
Cuban ports by privateer Sumter as prizes.

20. Rebel Congress met at Richmond, Va.

21. Battle of Bull Run.

22. Brig.-Gen. Beauregard promoted to the rank of “General” in the rebel
army, the highest grade.

22. Rebel Congress appointed a day of thanksgiving for the victory at
Manassas.

22. Maj. Gen. McClellan assigned to command the Department of the
Potomac.

22. Missouri State Convention met at Jefferson City.

22. Rebels attacked and dispersed at Forsythe, Mo., by Federal troops
under Gen. Sweeny, with loss of two wounded. Rebel loss, 5 killed, 10
wounded.

24. Naval expedition from Fortress Monroe to Black river, by Lieut.
Crosby and 300 men. Nine sloops and schooners of the rebels burnt, and
one schooner with bacon and corn captured.

25. U. S. steamer Resolute, Lieut. Budd, brought two schooners and one
sloop prizes to Washington.

25. Gen. McClellan arrived at Washington, and Gen. Fremont at St. Louis,
and Gen. Banks at Harper’s Ferry, to take charge of their respective
departments.

25. Robert Toombs resigned the Secretaryship of State of the
Confederacy, to take office in the army, and R. M. T. Hunter, of Va.,
was appointed to succeed him.

26. Fifteen Home Guards from Rolla, Mo., were attacked at Lane’s Prairie
by a superior force of rebels, who were repulsed with the loss of 1
lieutenant killed and 3 men wounded. Two guards were slightly wounded.

26. Three rebels captured by Col. McLeod Murphy, of New York, in
Virginia, scouting alone.

28. Flight of Gen. Wise’s army from Gauley Bridge, Va., pursued by Gen.
Cox, who captured 1000 muskets and a quantity of powder.

28. A detachment of Col. Mulligan’s Chicago regiment, aided by Home
Guards, captured 28 rebels, 40 horses and 2 teams, at Hickory Hill, Mo.

29. A rebel battery at Aquia Creek, Va., engaged by four U. S. steamers
for three hours, with slight damage.

30. Six Government clerks at Washington resigned, owing to a Virginia
ordinance of disfranchisement.

30. Three hundred kegs of powder and 6 cannon were captured from the
rebels near Warsaw, Mo.

30. The Confederate forces occupied and fortified New Madrid, Mo.

30–31. Missouri State Convention abolished the State Legislature,
declared the offices of Governor, Lieut.-Gov. and Sec.-of-State vacant,
appointed special State officers, and provided for a special election by
the people in Aug. 1862.

=Aug. 1.= Rebel privateer Petrel, formerly U. S. revenue cutter Aiken,
sunk by U. S. frigate St. Lawrence, near Charleston. Thirty-six out of
40 of her crew were rescued by the frigate’s boats.

1. Gov. Gamble, of Mo., delivered his inaugural to the State Convention.

1. Departure of Gen. Fremont’s expedition from St. Louis to Cairo and
Bird’s Point.

2. Fort Fillmore, New Mexico, with 750 men, traitorously surrendered by
Major Lynde, U. S. A.

2. Schooner Enchantress, with a valuable cargo, recaptured by U. S.
steamer Albatross, Capt. Prentiss, off Charleston, S. C.

2. Defeat of rebel forces at Dug Spring, Mo., by Gen. Lyon. Federal
loss, 9 killed, 30 wounded. Rebel loss, 40 killed, 80 wounded.

3. Lieut.-Col. Baylor, commanding the rebel forces in Arizona, issued a
proclamation taking possession of New Mexico, in the name of the
Confederate States, declaring all Federal offices vacant, and appointing
a secretary, attorney general and other officers.

3. Engagement at Mesila, N. M., between Federal troops and 700 rebels.
Capt. McNeely and Lieut. Brooks, of Federal army, were wounded, and 12
rebels killed.

5. The bark Alvarado, having a rebel prize crew, chased ashore near
Fernandina, Fla., and burned by sailors from U. S. ship Vincennes.

5. Skirmish at Point of Rocks, Md. Sixty men of New York 28th attacked
rebel cavalry, killing 3, wounding 2 and capturing 7 men and 20 horses,
without loss themselves.

5. Skirmish at Athens, Mo. 300 Home Guards, under Col. Moore, defeated a
force of 1000 rebels, killing 23 and wounding 50. 10 Federals killed and
10 wounded. 5 wagon loads of supplies and 40 horses were captured by the
Guards.

5. Election in Kentucky for members of the Legislature, the returns
showing a large Union majority.

6. Adjournment _sine die_ of Special Congress at Washington.

7. The village of Hampton, Va., was burned by rebel forces under Gen.
Magruder. They were prevented from burning the bridge by skirmishers of
Max Weber’s New York regiment.

7· The privateer York was burned by gunboat Union, which also recaptured
the schooner G. V. Baker.

8. Rebel cavalry routed at Lorrettsville, Va., with loss of 1 killed and
5 wounded, by 100 men of 19th N. Y., under Capt. Kennedy.

8. Messrs. Breckinridge and Vallandigham partook of a banquet at the
Eutaw House, Baltimore. Mr. Breckinridge, in an attempt to address the
people, was prevented by popular clamor.

9. Skirmish at Potosi, Mo. Rebels driven off with loss of 2 killed, 3
wounded.

10. Battle of Wilson’s Creek, Mo. The Federal army under Gen. Lyon,
5,200 men, was defeated by the combined forces of Gens. Price and
McCulloch, 20,000. Gen. Lyon was killed. Federal loss, 223 killed, 721
wounded, 292 missing. Rebel loss, (McCulloch’s report,) 265 killed, 800
wounded, 30 missing; Price’s report of Missouri troops, 156 killed, 517
wounded.

12. “Bangor (Me.) Democrat” office destroyed by a mob.

12. C. J. Faulkener, ex-minister of U. S. to France, arrested on a
charge of treason.

13. Skirmish near Grafton, Va. 200 rebels routed, 21 killed and wounded,
by Capt. Dayton’s company of 4th Virginia, without loss.

14. Mutiny in New York 79th regiment, near Washington.

14 Gen. Fremont declares martial law in St. Louis, Mo.

14 “War Bulletin” and “Missourian” journals suppressed at St. Louis.

14. Mutiny of 60 men of 2d Maine at Arlington, Va.; who were arrested
and sentenced to be sent to the Dry Tortugas.

14. All loyal men notified by Jeff. Davis to leave the Confederate
States in 40 days.

15. Two Federal sailors killed and 2 wounded, of the U. S. steamer
Resolute, in a skirmish at Mathias Point, Va.

16. Col Hecker’s regiment surprised 400 rebels at Fredericktown, Mo.,
capturing 12 men and all the camp equipage.

16. Five New York newspapers were presented by the Grand Jury as hostile
to the Government.

16. A “Peace” meeting at Saybrook, Conn., broken up.

16. $58,000 seized by U. S. troops at Genevieve, Mo., and taken to St.
Louis.

16. Proclamation of Pres. Lincoln, declaring commercial intercourse with
the eleven States in rebellion unlawful, excepting such parts thereof as
have or may become restored to loyal government, and forfeiting all
vessels therefrom or bound to the same, after 15 days.

17. Railway train near Palmyra, Mo., fired into by rebels. One soldier
was killed, and several wounded.

18. Privateer Jeff. Davis wrecked on the bar at St. Augustine, Fla.

18. Gen. Wool assumed command at Fortress Monroe.

19. Capt. Haleman with 50 mounted men left Bird’s Point for Charleston,
Mo., and encountered a body of rebels, killing 2 and capturing 33 men
and 35 horses, without any casualty themselves.

19. Skirmish at Charleston, Mo. Two hundred and fifty of 22d Illinois
under Col. Dougherty, and Lieut.-Col. Ransom of 11th Illinois defeated
300 rebels under Col. Hunter of Jeff. Thompson’s army. 20 rebels were
killed and wounded, and 17 prisoners taken. The Union loss was 1 killed
and 6 wounded.

19. Two hundred and forty Union fugitives from E. Tenn. arrived at
Danville, Ky., and were fed in the Seminary yard.

19. Office of the “Sentinel,” Easton, Pa., destroyed by a Union mob.

19. A. L. Kimball, editor of the “Essex Co. Democrat,” Haverhill, Mass.,
was tarred and feathered, and ridden on a rail by a Union mob.

19. “Passports” required, by notice from the Department of State, from
all persons leaving or arriving within the United States.

19. Office of the “Jeffersonian,” Westchester, Pa., destroyed by a Union
mob.

19. Office of “The People’s Friend,” at Covington, Ind., destroyed by a
Union mob.

20. Skirmish at Hawk’s Nest, in the Kanawha Valley, Va. A body of rebels
attacked the 11th Ohio, but were driven back with loss. Union loss, 2
wounded and 1 missing.

20. The Wheeling (Va.,) Convention passed an ordinance to erect a new
State, to be called Kanawha.

20. A railway train from Jefferson City, Mo., when near Lookout Station,
was fired into by rebels, and 1 soldier killed and 6 wounded. 2 rebels
were killed, several wounded, and 5 prisoners taken.

20. Gen. McClellan assumed command of the army of the Potomac.

20. Gen. Butler assumed command of U.S. Volunteer forces near Fortress
Monroe.

21. Surprise of part of company K, Ohio 7th, near Cross Lane, W.
Virginia, 2 killed and 9 wounded, 5 of whom were taken prisoners,
including Capt. Shutte.

22. Disloyal papers were rejected from the U. S. mails. Large bundles of
papers were seized by the U. S. Marshals in Philadelphia and other
cities.

22. The “Stark County Democrat” office, in Canton, Ohio, was destroyed
by a Union mob.

22. The steamer “Samuel Orr” was seized at Paducah, Ky., by rebels, and
taken up the Tennessee river.

24. A portion of the Cherokee Indians made an alliance with the
“Southern Confederacy.” The Cherokees and Creeks raised 2,000 men for
the rebel army, and were promised payment of their annuities by the
Confed. Commissioners.

24. Arrest of Mayor Berret, of Washington.

24. The office of the Bridgeport (Conn.,) “Farmer” was destroyed by a
Union mob.

24. Office of the “Alleghanian,” Cumberland, Md., was destroyed by a
Union mob.

25. A band of rebels at Wayne Court-House, Va., was routed by 53
Federals under Capt. Smith, from Camp Pierpont, Ceredo, Wayne co., Va. 4
rebels were killed, and 8 taken prisoners.

25. All vessels and boats on the Potomac seized by Government
authorities.

25. Gov. H. R. Gamble, of Mo., issued a call for 42,000 State militia,
to serve six months, unless sooner discharged.

26. Surprise of 7th Ohio, Col. Tyler, at Cross Lanes, near Summersville,
W. Virginia, by a large force of rebels. 15 killed, 40 wounded, and 30
prisoners. Rebel loss not known.

26. The War Department prohibited the transmission or publication of any
intelligence of army or naval movements calculated to give information
to the enemy.

26. The Postmaster-General directed postal agents to arrest express
agents or others engaged in transmitting letters to seceded States in
violation of the President’s proclamation of 16th inst.

26. Com. Foote ordered to the command of U. S. naval forces on the
Western waters.

26. A naval and military expedition to N. Carolina coast sailed from
Hampton Roads, Va., under command of Com. Stringham and Maj.-Gen.
Butler.

26. Skirmish of two companies of N. Y. 23d, with a large force of rebels
at Ball’s Cross Roads, Va. One Federal killed, and one wounded.

28. A party of Federal troops under Capt. Smith attacked and dispersed a
force of rebels at Wayne Court-House, W. Virginia, and returned to
Ceredo without loss. Five or 6 of the rebels were killed or wounded, and
8 captured.

28–29. Bombardment and capture of Forts Hatteras and Clark, at Hatteras
Inlet, N. C. 30 pieces of cannon, 1,000 stand of arms, 3 vessels with
valuable cargoes, and 750 prisoners were taken.

29. Fight at Lexington, Mo. The rebels, under Col. Reed, were driven off
with loss of 8 killed and several wounded. The Federals had 5 or 6
wounded, and several loyal citizens were captured.

30. Martial law was proclaimed throughout Missouri, by Gen. Fremont, and
the slaves of all persons found in arms against the U. S. declared free.

=Sept. 1.= Skirmish at Bennett’s Mills, Mo. Attack on Home Guards
commanded by Lieut. Chandler, by a large force of rebels. Federal loss,
3 killed, 6 wounded. Rebel loss unknown.

1. Fight at Boone Court-House, Va. Rebels defeated, with a loss of 30.
Six Federal soldiers wounded.

2. Fight near Fort Scott, Mo. 600 rebels under Gen. Rains, were attacked
and pursued by 500 Federals under Col. Montgomery. The rebels falling
back on reinforcements, Montgomery retreated.

2. The Mass. 13th captured 20 Charleston, S. C., cavalry, after killing
3 and wounding 5, 2½-miles from Harper’s Ferry.

2. Col. Crossman, of Gen. Kelly’s staff, with two companies, attacked
400 rebels, at Worthington, Marion co., Va., by whom he was repulsed
with the loss of two men.

3. Passenger train on the Hannibal and St. Joseph railway, Mo., was
thrown into the Platte river, by the giving way of a bridge, partly
burned by the rebels. 17 persons were killed, and 60 wounded.

4. An engagement on the Mississippi river occurred, near Hickman, Ky.,
between national gunboats Tyler and Lexington and the rebel gunboat
Yankee and shore batteries.

6. Paducah, Ky., was occupied by Federal forces under Gen. Grant.

7. Gens. Pillow and Polk occupied Columbus, Ky., with 7,000 rebels.

7. Five schooners were captured by Federal officers at Hatteras Inlet.

8. Gen. Pope broke up a camp of 3,000 rebels near Hunneville, Mo., under
Gen. Green, and captured a large quantity of stores.

9. A revolt occurred among the N. Y. Rifles, at Willett’s Point, N. Y.
Two men were killed and 5 wounded.

9. A government steamer conveying prisoners from Lexington, Mo., to Fort
Leavenworth, broke her rudder, and being obliged to land, the vessel was
seized by the rebels, the prisoners liberated, and 40 Federal soldiers
captured.

10. 156 Union prisoners, among them all the principal officers held
captive by the rebels at Richmond, were sent to Castle Pinckney, in
Charleston harbor.

10. Battle of Carnifex Ferry, near Summersville, Va. Federal commander,
Rosecranz, rebel, Floyd, who retreated with small loss. Federal loss, 16
killed, 102 wounded.

11. Skirmish at Lewinsville, Va. Federal loss, 6 killed, 10 wounded.

11. The President modified Gen. Fremont’s emancipation proclamation.

11. The Kentucky Legislature, by a vote of 71 to 26, ordered the
Confederate troops to leave the State.

12. A rebel camp at Petersburg, Hardy co., Va., was broken up by Capt.
Kid’s cavalry, and large amount of stores captured.

12. Skirmish at Black river, near Ironton, Mo. A detachment of Indiana
cavalry, under Major Gavitt, defeated a body of rebels, under Ben.
Talbot, killing 5, capturing 4, and 25 horses and a quantity of arms.

12. The Legislature of Kentucky authorized the Governor to call out the
State military to repel the Southern invaders.

12. Two slaves, the property of T. L. Snead, a secessionist of St.
Louis, were manumitted by Gen. Fremont.

13. A large body of rebels, under Col. Brown, were repulsed from
Booneville, Mo., with a loss of 12 killed and 30 wounded, by Home Guards
under Capt. Eppstein, who lost 1 killed and 4 wounded.

12–14. Two engagements occurred on Cheat Mountain, Western Va., in which
the rebels, under Gen. R. E. Lee, were defeated with a loss of 100
killed and wounded, among the former, Col. J. A. Washington, and 20
prisoners. The Federal forces, under Gen. J. J. Reynolds, lost 13
killed, 20 wounded, and 60 prisoners.

13–18. The provost-marshal of Baltimore, Md., arrested Mayor Brown, Ross
Winans, and Messrs. Pitts, Sangster, Wallis, Scott, Dennison, Quinlan,
Lynch, Warfield, Hanson, and J. C. Brune, of the Legislature, also
editors Howard and Hall, by order of the War Department.

13. An expedition from the U.S. frigate Colorado, under Lieut. J. H.
Russell, cut out and destroyed the privateer Judah, under the rebel guns
at Pensacola. The Federal loss was 3 killed and 15 wounded.

14. A rebel camp near Kansas City, Mo., was broken up; 7 men killed and
6 taken prisoners.

18. Col. F. P. Blair, Jr., was arrested at St. Louis for disrespectful
language when alluding to superior officers.

15. A body of rebels attacked Col. Geary’s 28th Pennsylvania regiment,
stationed on the Potomac, three miles above Harper’s Ferry, and were
repulsed with severe loss. One of Col. Geary’s men was killed, and
several slightly wounded.

16. A naval expedition from Hatteras Inlet under command of Lieut. J. Y.
Maxwell, destroyed Fort Ocracoke, on Beacon Island, N. C.

16. The Federal gunboat Conestoga captured the steamers V. R. Stephenson
and Gazelle, on Cumberland river, Ky.

16. Ship Island, near the mouth of the Mississippi river, was occupied
by Federal forces from the steamer Massachusetts.

17. A fight took place at Mariatown, Mo., between 600 Federals, under
Cols. Montgomery and Johnson, and 400 rebels, who were defeated with a
loss of 7 killed, and 100 horses and their tents and supplies captured.
Col. Johnson and 2 Federal privates were killed, and 6 wounded.

17. A train on the Ohio and Mississippi railway, with a part of the 19th
Illinois regiment, broke through a bridge near Huron, Ind., by which 26
soldiers were killed and 112 wounded.

17. 500 of the 3d Iowa, under Lieut.-Col. Scott, attacked and were
repulsed by 3,000 rebels, under Gen. D. R. Atchison, at Blue Mills
Landing, Mo. The Federal loss was over 100 in killed and wounded.

18. Skirmish at Barboursville, Ky., between the Home Guard and
Zollicoffer’s men. 7 rebels were killed, and 1 guard wounded and another
taken prisoner.

18. Eighteen secession members of the Maryland Legislature were arrested
and lodged in Fort McHenry.

19. Ex-Governor Morehead and others, of Louisville, Ky., were arrested
by the U. S. marshal on charges of treason, or complicity with treason.

20. Surrender of Col. Mulligan’s command, at Lexington, Mo., to the
rebel Gen. Price, after 4 days’ siege.

21. Gen. Lane’s command surprised a superior force of rebels at
Papinsville, Mo., routing them with a Union loss of 17 killed and 40
wounded; rebel loss, 40 killed, 100 prisoners, and all their tents and
supplies.

21. Two detachments of troops from Union gunboats, near Glasgow, Mo.,
encountered each other, while reconnoitering at night, and by mistake
four were killed and several wounded.

21. Gen. Robert Anderson assumed command of Federal and State troops in
Ivy.

21. J. C. Breckinridge fled from Frankfort, Ky., and openly joined the
rebels.

22. Skirmish of the 7th Iowa, at Elliott’s Mills, Ky., with rebel
cavalry, who were defeated with the loss of three of their number.

23. Ross Winans, of Md., took the oath of allegiance.

23. Capt. Goldsborough succeeded Com. Stringham in command of the
Chesapeake blockading fleet.

23. Detachments of 8th and 4th Ohio, and Ringgold’s cavalry, under Cols.
Parke and Cantwell, advancing from New Creek toward Romney, Va.,
attacked and drove out 700 rebels from Mechanicsville Gap, and pursued
their combined forces of 1,400 from Romney to the mountains. Federal
loss 3 killed, 10 wounded; rebel loss 15 killed, 30 wounded.

24. The Comte de Paris and the Duc de Chartres, grandsons of Louis
Philippe of France, were attached as aids to Gen. McClellan’s staff, and
commissioned as captains.

25. Successful expedition of 3,000 men, under Gen. W. F. Smith, for
reconnoitering and forage, from Chain Bridge to Lewinsville, Va. A large
quantity of stores were captured.

25. Engagement at Chapmansville, Western Va. Col. Pratt, with 560 of the
34th Ohio, defeated a body of rebels under Col. J. W. Davis, killing 29,
including their commander, and wounding a large number. Col. Pratt’s
loss was 4 killed, 8 wounded.

25. A body of rebels were defeated near Osceola, Mo., by Federal troops
under Col. Montgomery, who set fire to the town. 10 rebels killed; 1
Federal killed, 4 wounded.

25. James B. Clay (son of the illustrious Henry,) and 16 other rebels
were captured near Danville, Ky., while on their way to Zollicoffer’s
camp.

26. At Lucas Bend, Ky., 75 of Captain Stewart’s cavalry attacked and
routed 40 rebel cavalry, killing 4 and capturing 5, without loss
themselves.

26. By Presidential proclamation of August 12, this day was observed as
a day of fasting and prayer throughout the loyal States.

27. A body of Kansas troops, under Montgomery and Jamison, engaged the
advance guard of McCulloch’s rebel army near Shanghai, in Benton co.,
Mo., and drove them back with loss.

27. Gen. Fremont, with 15 steamers and 15,000 men, sailed from St. Louis
up the Missouri river.

27. The rebels evacuated Munson’s Hill, Va., which was occupied by
Federal troops.

28. Baker’s California regiment, and Baxter’s Philadelphia volunteers
mistook each other for rebels, at Fall’s Church, Va., and fired, killing
15 and wounding 30.

=Oct. 1.= The U. S. steamer Fanny, with 35 men of the 9th N. Y.
volunteers, was captured by the rebels on the north coast of Hatteras
Inlet. She was loaded with government stores.

2. A secessionist camp at Charleston, Mo., was broken up, and 40 rebels
captured.

2. $33,000, deposited in the St. Louis Building and Savings Association,
for the part payment of a U. S. annuity to the Cherokee Indians,
declared confiscated to the Government in consequence of the secession
of that tribe.

3. Attack on an entrenched camp commanded by Gen. H. A. Jackson, at
Greenbrier, Western Va., by Union forces under Gen. J. J. Reynolds.
Union loss 8 killed, 32 wounded; rebel loss greater. A drawn battle.

3. Gen. Price, and the rebel army under his command, withdrew from
Lexington, Mo., leaving a brigade as a guard.

3. Gustavus Smith, formerly Street Commissioner of New York, was
appointed a Major-General in the rebel army.

4. Commander Alden, U. S. steamer South Carolina, captured two schooners
off the S.W. Pass of the Mississippi, with four to five thousand stand
of arms.

4. A company of 110 Texas rangers were defeated by 100 U. S. troops from
Fort Craig, at Alimosa, N. M. 10 Texans and their captain killed, and 30
wounded.

4. Two boats from U. S. steamer Louisiana, Lieut. A. Murray, destroyed a
rebel schooner, being fitted out for a privateer, at Chincoteague Inlet,
Va. They engaged and repulsed the rebels with a loss of 4 U. S. seamen
wounded.

4. A large force of rebels, under Col. Wright, attacked the 20th
Indiana, Col. Brown, at Chicamacomico, near Hatteras Inlet. Federals
retreated, leaving their pickets, wounded, and camp equipage in the
hands of the enemy.

4. Gen. Butler, commanding the Military Department of New England, had
his headquarters at Boston.

5. The rebel forces under Col. Wright were driven from the Chicamacomico
with severe loss, by U.S. steamer Monticello.

7. John Ross, principal Chief of the Cherokee Indians, negotiated a
treaty of alliance on behalf of that people with the Confederate
Government.

7. 57 released prisoners, taken by the rebels at the battle of Bull Run,
arrived at Fortress Monroe from Richmond.

7. U. S. gunboats Tyler and Lexington exchanged shots with rebel
batteries at Iron Bend, 3 miles above Columbus, Ky.

8. Brig.-Gen. William T. Sherman appointed to command the Department of
the Cumberland (Kentucky), in place of Brig.-Gen. R. Anderson, retired
from ill-health.

8. 200 rebels under Capt. Holliday, encamped two miles from Hillsboro’,
Ky., were attacked and defeated by a body of Home Guards, under Lieut.
Sadler. Rebel loss 11 killed, 29 wounded, 22 prisoners; also 127 rifles
and other arms. Federal loss 3 killed, 3 wounded.

9. Attack upon Wilson’s N. Y. Zouaves, at Santa Rosa Island, four miles
from Fort Pickens, at 2 A. M., by 1,500 rebels under Gen. Anderson. The
regulars from Fort Pickens, and the Zouaves, defeated the rebels,
killing and wounding about 100, and taking 35 prisoners. Federal loss 13
killed, 21 wounded.

9. Federal troops under Gen. Smith advanced from Chain Bridge, and
occupied Lewinsville, Va.

10. Cavalry skirmish 4 miles from Paducah, Ky. 2 of the 4th U. S.
cavalry mortally wounded, and 2 taken prisoners.

11. The rebel steamer Nashville, commanded by Lieut. R. B. Pegram,
escaped from Charleston, S. C.

11. Lieut. Harrell, of U. S. steamer Union, with three boats’ crews, cut
out and burnt a rebel schooner in Dumfries Creek, on the Potomac, and
escaped without loss.

11. Missouri State Convention met at St. Louis.

11. Marshal Kane was transferred from Fort McHenry to Fort Lafayette.

12. Rebel steamer Theodora ran the blockade at Charleston, S. C., having
on board Messrs. Mason and Slidell, Commissioners to England and France,
with their secretaries.

12. Capt. P. G. Morton captured a train of 21 wagons, 425 cattle, and 35
prisoners, with stores for hostile Cherokees, at Chelsea, Kansas.

12. Cavalry skirmish south of Cameron, Ray co., Mo. A company of Major
James’ cavalry routed a large body of rebels, who lost 8 killed and 5
prisoners. One Federal was killed and 4 wounded.

12. Six rebel gunboats, the ram Manassas, and a fleet of fireships,
attacked the U. S. fleet at the mouth of the Mississippi, and were
repulsed by them with slight loss on either side.

12. A party of 12 of a N.Y. Zouave regiment, under Lieut. Zeller, were
captured by the rebels near Newport News, Va.

12. Forty men of the 39th Indiana attacked and defeated a superior force
of rebels, 8 miles from Green river, Western Va., without loss
themselves, killing 5 and wounding 3 of the enemy.

12. Night skirmish near the residence of Cy. Hutchinson, Barren co., Ky.
Ten Federal horsemen, under Cols. Hobson and Pennebraker, and Capt. S.
Taylor, encountered 100 rebel cavalry, of whom 4 were killed and several
wounded. Federal loss, 3 killed.

12. 500 men of the Piatt (Cincinnati) Zouaves, under Lieut, Col. Toland,
and two companies of the 4th Va., drove out a large body of rebels from
Winfield, 20 miles below Charleston, on the Kanawha, Western Va., who
had been committing depredations. The Federals captured a large quantity
of military stores.

12. Skirmish between a detachment of the 39th Indiana, under Lieut.-Col.
Jones, and 58 rebel cavalry, near Upton’s, 14 miles below Camp Nevin,
Ky. The rebels were repulsed with a loss of 5 killed and 3 wounded.

12. A woman and five children, from families of U. S. soldiers from
Utah, were drowned while attempting to cross the Platte river on a raft,
near St. Josephs, Mo., the rope having been cut by an enemy.

13. Eighteen miles N.E. of Lebanon, Mo., Major Wright, with two
companies of U.S. cavalry, routed 300 mounted rebels, under Capts.
Lorrels and Wright. 62 of the rebels were killed and wounded, and 30
taken prisoners. One Federal trooper was killed.

13. Skirmish at Beckweth’s farm, 12 miles S.E. of Bird’s Point, Mo. 20
men under Lieut. Tufts, encountered a superior force of rebels, and
after engaging them retired. 2 were killed, 5 wounded, and 3 missing, of
the national force: 12 were killed and wounded of the rebels.

13. Brig Grenada, of New York, was captured by the privateer “Sallie,”
of Charleston, which ran the blockade on the 10th instant.

14. 150 voters of Chincoteague Island, Accomac co., Va., took the oath
of allegiance to the U. S., in the presence of Lieut. Murray, of U. S.
ship Louisiana. The inhabitants of the island, 1,000 in number, were
loyal: no other flag than the national had thus far been allowed to
float on the island.

14. Major White, with one company of Missouri Scouts, captured 45 rebels
at Linn Creek, Mo., commanded by Capt. Roberts.

14. The U. S. Secretary of State, Wm. H. Seward, issued a circular to
the Governors of all States bordering on the ocean and the lakes,
recommending that their defences should be put in effective condition to
meet the contingency of foreign war, instigated by rebel emissaries.

5. U. S. steamer Roanoke, off Charleston, captured and burnt the ship
Thomas Watson, which ran on Stono reef while attempting to evade the
blockade.

15. Ten of the N. Y. 14th killed 2 rebels in a skirmish near
Lewinsville, Va.

15. Gen. Wool, at Fortress Monroe, declined to receive a flag of truce
from Norfolk.

15. 600 rebels, under Gen. Jeff. Thompson, attacked and captured 40 U.
S. soldiers guarding the Big river bridge, near Potosi, Mo. Federal loss
1 killed, 6 wounded; rebel loss 5 killed, 4 wounded. The rebels paroled
the U. S. soldiers and burnt the bridge.

15. The rebel batteries at Aquia creek and Shipping Point, on the
Potomac, fired on all vessels passing, but inflicted no serious damage.

15. Three U. S. steamers sailed from New York in pursuit of the
privateer Nashville.

16. Col. J. W. Geary, of the Penn. 28th, with 400 men from his own, the
13th Mass, and 3d Wis., crossed the Potomac at Harper’s Ferry, and
captured 21,000 bushels of wheat, stored in a mill near Bolivar Heights.
A severe skirmish occurred with a body of rebels who disputed the
ground, from whom the Federals captured a 32-pounder, and made good
their retreat, accomplishing the object of the expedition. Federal loss,
4 killed, 8 wounded.

16. Major F. J. White, with 220 Missouri scouts, surprised the rebels at
Lexington, Mo., and without loss, captured 60 or 70 prisoners, released
Cols. White and Grover, and 12 other captives, and seized 2 steamboats,
with arms, ammunition and stores.

16. 1,000 rebels under Gen. Thompson and Col. Lowe, near Ironton, Mo.,
were defeated with a loss of 36 killed and wounded, by Maj. Gavitt’s
Indiana cavalry, and 5 companies of Col. Alexander’s 21st Illinois.
Union loss, 11.

19. Col. Morgan, with 220 men of the 18th Missouri regiment, and two
pieces of artillery, defeated 400 rebels on Big Hurricane Creek, Carroll
co., Mo., killing 14, and taking 8 prisoners. Col. Morgan had 14 men
wounded—two mortally.

19. Twenty rebel N. C. prisoners were sent to Fortress Monroe, to be
released on taking an oath not to bear arms against the Government.

21. Battle of Edward’s Ferry, Va. 1,900 men from Gen. C. P. Stone’s
division, under command of Col. E. D. Baker, U. S. senator from Oregon,
were ordered to cross the Potomac at Harrison’s Island, or Ball’s Bluff,
to support reconnoissances above and below that point. At 4 P. M. they
were attacked by 3,000 rebels under Gen. Evans, and driven to the river
bank, where, there being no adequate provision for crossing, they
suffered severe loss, by the enemy’s fire, and by drowning. Killed, 223,
wounded, 250, taken prisoners, 500. Rebel loss about 200 in killed and
wounded.

21. About 2,500 rebels, near Fredericktown, Mo., under Jeff. Thompson
and Col. Lowe, were attacked by 3,500 Federal troops, commanded by Col.
J. B. Plummer, of 11th Missouri, with Missouri, Illinois, Wisconsin and
Indiana troops, under Cols. Ross, Marsh, Hovey, Baker, Lieut.-Col.
Pennabaker, Maj. Schofield, Capt. Stewart and Lieut. White. The rebels
were defeated with great loss, and Col. Lowe was killed. They left 175
bodies on the field, and had a large number wounded. Eighty were taken
prisoners, and 4 heavy guns were captured. The Federal loss was 7 killed
and 60 wounded.

21. A portion of the rebel General Zollicoffer’s command was repulsed
from an advanced position of General Schoepf’s brigade, near Camp Wild
Cat, Laurel co., Ky. The Federal loss was 4 killed and 21 wounded.

22. Flag-officer Craven, of the Potomac flotilla, reported the Potomac
river commanded by rebel batteries, at all important points below
Alexandria.

22. A detachment of U. S. cavalry broke up a rebel camp at Buffalo
Mills, Benton co., Mo., killing and wounding 20, taking 60 prisoners, 22
wagons and a number of horses.

23. Col. Len. Harris, with the 2d Ohio, two guns of Capt. Konkle’s Ohio
battery and Capt. Laughlin’s cavalry, drove out a body of 200 rebels
from West Liberty, Morgan co., Ky., after a skirmish in which 10 were
killed, 5 wounded, and 6 made prisoners, of the rebels, with no loss on
the part of the Federals. A small quantity of stores was captured.

23. Fifty men of the 6th Indiana while skirmishing near Hodgesville,
Ky., were attacked by a superior force of rebels, whom they repulsed,
killing 3 and wounding 5. Three of the Federals were severely wounded,
including Lieut. Grayson, their commander.

23. Gen. Fred. W. Lander was appointed to command the brigade of the
late Col. Baker.

24. President Lincoln suspended the writ of _habeas corpus_, so far as
related to military arrests, in the District of Columbia.

24. The steamer Salvor was captured while attempting to run the blockade
at Tampa Bay, Fla.

24. Western Virginia voted almost unanimously in favor of a division of
the State.

24. The western section of the California telegraph was completed to
Salt Lake City, connecting the wires from the Pacific to the Atlantic
ocean.

24. Skirmish between the pickets of Gen. Wm. T. Ward and a scouting
party of rebels near Campbellsville, Ky. Several of the rebels were
killed and wounded, and their captain taken prisoner.

25. 160 of Gen. Fremont’s Body-guard, under command of Major Zagonyi,
charged 2,000 rebels, drawn up to receive them, near Springfield, Mo.,
routed them, and occupied the town. Rebel loss, 106 killed, many
wounded, and 27 prisoners. Zagonyi’s loss, 15 killed, 27 wounded, 10
missing. The Missouri “Prairie Scouts,” under Maj. F. J. White, attacked
the rear of the rebel force, at the same time, making three successful
charges, and inflicting severe loss on the enemy. The loss of the
“Scouts” was 33 in killed, wounded and missing.

26. An artillery fight across the Potomac, at Edward’s Ferry, for
several hours. Two killed in Gen. Banks’ encampment, and 3 wounded. Both
parties were compelled to move back their encampments.

26. Gen. B. F. Kelly, with 2,500 Virginia and Ohio Volunteers, from New
Creek, Va., attacked an inferior rebel force near Romney, who were
routed and pursued through that town with severe loss. Col. Thos. Johns,
of 2d regiment, Potomac Home Brigade, made a diversion of the enemy’s
force, by marching to the rear of Romney, by way of Frankfort, and
engaged and held in check a regiment of the rebels. The expedition was
successful in capturing a large supply of military stores and
provisions. Federal loss, 2 killed, 14 wounded. Rebel loss, 10 killed,
15 wounded, and a number of prisoners, including Col. Angus McDonald,
their commander: their artillery wagons, camps, etc., were captured.

26. Parson Brownlow was forced to suspend the publication of the
Knoxville (Tenn.) _Whig_.

26. A wagon train was established between Baltimore and Washington, for
want of sufficient railway facilities, consequent on the danger from
rebel batteries in navigating the Potomac.

26. Major Phillips, with 300 of the 9th Illinois, from Paducah, sailed
on the steamer Conestoga to West Eddyville, Ky., on the Cumberland
river, where they landed and marched 6 miles to Saratoga, and surprised
a detachment of rebel cavalry, under Capt. Wilcox. After a brief
resistance the enemy fled, losing 13 killed, many wounded, 24 prisoners,
and 52 horses. Four of the Illinois men were wounded.

26. Surprise of a rebel encampment at Plattsburg, Clinton co., Mo., by a
superior force of Federals. Rebel loss, 8 killed, 12 prisoners, one
cannon, and a quantity of small arms.

28. Three rebel vessels were surprised and burnt at Chincoteague Inlet,
Va., by a portion of the crew of U. S. gunboat Louisiana, under Lieut.
A. Hopkins.

28. D. Davis, of Ill., J. Holt, of Ky., and H. Campbell, of Mo., were
appointed Commissioners by Pres. Lincoln to audit all unsettled military
claims in Missouri.

29. 250 U.S. Kentucky volunteers, under Col. Burbridge, marched from
Owensboro’ to Morgantown, Ky., crossed the river at that point, defeated
a superior rebel force and destroyed their camp. Federal loss, 2
wounded.

28. Gen. J. B. Henderson, with a superior force, surrounded and captured
400 rebels at Dyer’s Mills, near Concord, Mo. They were allowed to lay
down their arms and return home.

29. Nearly 100 “contrabands” arrived at Fortress Monroe in two days.

29. Rebel State “Conference” at Russellville, Ky.

29. The great naval expedition sailed from Fortress Monroe, under the
command of Flag-officer Com. Samuel F. Dupont, comprising 77 vessels of
all classes. The land forces, numbering 20,000 men, were commanded by
Brig.-Gen. Thos. W. Sherman.

31. Skirmish at Morgantown, Green River, Ky. Col. McHenry’s command
drove a party of rebels attached to Buckner’s camp across the river,
with loss.

31. At N. York, the jury empaneled for the trial of the sailors captured
on the privateer Savannah, the first rebel armed vessel that was
commissioned, failed to agree.

=Nov. 1.= Lieut.-Gen. Winfield Scott, at his own request, was retired
from active service, and Maj.-Gen. George B. McClellan was appointed to
succeed him as Commander-in-chief of the U. S. army.

1. Lieut.-Col. Morse, with 450 cavalry and infantry, surprised and
routed a rebel force 800 strong, under Col. Sweeny, in camp near Renick,
Randolph co., Mo.

1. Rebels from Gen. Floyd’s command attacked a Federal camp at Gauley
Bridge, Va., by cannonading from the opposite shore. They were driven
into the hills by 3 companies from Gen. Benham’s camp, at Hawk’s Nest.

1. A violent storm overtook the naval expedition off the N. C. coast. 3
vessels were disabled and returned, 2 were driven ashore, and 2
foundered. Seven lives lost.

2. Gen. Fremont, at Springfield, received an order from Washington,
relieving him from command of the Department of Missouri. Gen. Hunter
was appointed temporarily to the command.

2. An address was issued by Gov. Harris, of Tenn., calling upon the
people to furnish every shot-gun and rifle to defend the soil.

2. Major Joseph’s Missouri militia, numbering 129, were attacked at
Platte City, Mo., by Silas Gordon with 300 rebels, who were repulsed
with a loss of 13 killed and wounded, 30 prisoners, many guns, and all
their equipments.

2. The English steamer Bermuda ran the blockade at Charleston, S. C.,
with 2,000 bales of cotton.

2. Prestonburg, Ky., was occupied by Union troops under Gen. Nelson,
without opposition.

3. _et seq._ Rising of Union men in E. Tenn., who burned or broke down
several important railroad bridges.

3. Five rebel boats made an attack on Fort Hatteras, N. C., but were
repulsed by the U. S. gunboat National, and the Fort.

3. Col. Greensle drove rebel troops from Houston, Mo., and returned to
Rolla with several prisoners and a large amount of property.

4. Enthusiastic Union meeting in Baltimore Co., Md., addressed by
Reverdy Johnson.

4. Barboursville, Ky., was occupied by 1,500 Federals without
opposition.

6. Extra session of South Carolina Legislature adjourned, after choosing
Presidential electors and ordering the banks to loan the State $300,000.

5. Colonel Corcoran and 15 other national officers who were prisoners,
were selected by lot by the rebels, as hostages, to be hung in the event
of that punishment being awarded to the privateers held by the national
government.

6. Two parties of rebel troops met above Newport News, Va., and by
mistake fired on each other, killing and wounding a number. Among the
killed was Major Bailey, of Mobile.

6. The grand jury at Frankfort, Ky., found indictments for treason
against 32 prominent citizens, among whom were R. J. Breckinridge, Jr.,
J. C. Breckinridge, Humphrey Marshall, and Benj. Desha.

6. Electors for President and V. President were chosen throughout the
revolted States, and also members of Congress.

6. 120 Federals, under Capt. Shields, were captured by 500 rebels near
Little Santa Fé, Mo. They were on their way to join Gen. Fremont’s
column.

6. The 13th Indiana regiment, Col. J. J. Sullivan, and Capt. Robinson’s
Ohio cavalry, returned to Huttonsville, Va., from an extensive march
through Webster Co. Several rebels were killed and wounded in scouting,
and 13 prisoners taken.

7. Battle of Belmont, Mo., Gens. Grant and McClernand with 2,850 men,
landed at Belmont at 8 A. M., drove in the rebel pickets and captured
their camp, which was burnt. A battery of 12 guns was taken, and about
200 prisoners. Meantime, a large reinforcement of rebels was landed from
Columbus, on the opposite side of the river, which intercepted Gen.
Grant’s army in their return to their boats. The Federals cut their way
through a much superior force of the enemy, losing 150 of their number
prisoners, together with their killed and wounded, who fell into the
hands of the rebels. Federal loss, 89 killed, 150 wounded, 150 missing.
The rebel loss was greater, 155 were taken prisoners.

7. Gen. Hunter, Fremont’s successor in Missouri, repudiated the
agreement just, made between Gens. Fremont and Price, the rebel
commander, concerning the privileges of unarmed citizens, and the
disarming of unrecognized bodies of men.

7. Skirmishing on New river, near Gauley Bridge, Va. Federal forces
under Gen. Rosecrans, drove off a body of rebels who had besieged his
camp for several days. Several rebels and one private of 13th Ohio
killed.

7. The Federal fleet under Com. Dupont captured Forts Warren and
Beauregard at Port Royal entrance, and took the town of Beaufort, S. C.,
with a loss of 8 killed, 6 badly wounded, and 17 slightly. None of the
national vessels seriously damaged. Rebel loss unknown, but not large.

7. Two launches and 40 men, commanded by Lieut. Jas. E. Jouett, from the
U.S. frigate Santee, off Galveston, Texas, surprised and burnt the rebel
privateer Royal Yacht, by night, after a sharp conflict, killing several
of the rebels, and capturing 13. Federal loss 2 killed and 7 wounded.

8. U. S. gunboat Rescue shelled out a rebel battery at Urbana Creek, on
the Rappahannock, Va., and captured a large schooner with stores.

8. Five railway bridges were burned in E. Tennessee by Unionists.

8. Capt. Wilkes, with the U. S. steam sloop-of-war San Jacinto,
overhauled the English mail-steamer Trent in the Bahama channel, and
took from her the rebel emissaries Mason and Slidell, with their
secretaries, who had taken passage for England.

8. Col. Grensle returned with his command to Rolla, Mo., from an
expedition against the rebels in Texas co., bringing 9 prisoners, 500
head of cattle and 40 horses and mules.

8. A portion of Gen. Nelson’s Ky. brigade were ambuscaded while on their
way to Piketon, Ky., by 200 rebels in a strong position. The rebels were
dispersed with the loss of 10 killed, 15 wounded. Gen. Nelson had 6
killed and 24 wounded. Another portion of Gen. Nelson’s brigade under
command of Col. Sill, reached Piketon by a circuitous route, and
attacked a body of rebels, defeating them with a small loss, and having
one Federal soldier killed.

8. A bridge on the E. Tenn. railway, 200 feet span, was destroyed by
Unionists. Also 4 on the line N. of Knoxville, and a heavy wooden bridge
at Charleston, Bradley co., Tenn.

9. Maj.-Gen. Henry W. Halleck, of Cal., was ordered to take command of
the Department of Missouri, in place of Gen. Fremont: Brig.-Gen. Don
Carlos Buell, of Ind., was appointed to command the Department of
Kentucky: Maj.-Gen. Hunter to command the Department of Kansas: Col. E.
R. S. Canley, the Department of N. Mexico.

10. A band of rebel marauders was captured by Lieut. Shriver, with a
squad of 1st Iowa cavalry, near Clark’s Station, Mo.

10. A portion of Gen. Cox’s brigade crossed the New river near Gauley,
Va., and attacked Floyd’s forces posted there, who retreated after a
severe skirmish, in which the 11th Ohio regiment lost 8 killed and 10
wounded.

10. 150 of the 9th Virginia regiment, Col. K. V. Whaley, were surprised
at Guyandotte, Va., on the Ohio river, by a superior force of rebels,
and after a sharp skirmish, in which 8 of the Federals were killed and
12 wounded, and nearly the same loss sustained by the rebels, Col.
Whaley and 45 of his men were captured, and the rest escaped. About
two-thirds of the town was burned next day by the Union Virginia and
Ohio troops who arrived there, in retaliation for the treachery and
cruelty of the rebel inhabitants evinced in the scenes of the
engagement.

11. At Columbus, Ky., two rebel lieutenants and six privates were killed
by the explosion of a Dahlgren gun. Rev. Maj.-Gen. Polk narrowly
escaped.

11. 110 of Col. Anthony’s regiment attacked a rebel camp on the Little
Blue river, near Kansas City, Mo., which proved too strong for them, and
after severe fight, Col. Anthony’s men were drawn off in good order,
losing 8 killed and 8 wounded.

12. Reconnoissance in force by Gen. Heintzelman, with 6,000 men, to
Occoquan Creek, Va., 18 miles from Alexandria. Capt. Todd’s company of
Lincoln cavalry were surprised by a superior force of rebels, 3 killed,
1 wounded and 3 taken prisoners, including the captain.

12. Attack on the U.S. fleet at the Passes of the Mississippi, by the
Manassas Ram, 5 gunboats and several fire ships, under command of Capt.
Hollins. U. S. ship Vincennes grounded, and the Richmond was damaged by
the ram and also grounded: but the enemy were driven off without
obtaining any advantage.

12. The privateer Beauregard, of Charleston, S. C., with 27 men, was
captured 100 miles E. N. E. of Abaco, by the U. S. sloop-of-war W. G.
Anderson, Lieut. W. C. Rogers, commanding.

12. Skirmish on Laurel Creek by portions of Gen. Benham’s with Gen.
Floyd’s forces, in which the rebels retreated after small loss.

12. Skirmish of Gen. Kelly’s pickets near Romney, Va., losing 2 killed
and several wounded. 12 rebels taken prisoners.

13. Rebel Gen. Zollicoffer retreated from Cumberland Ford to Cumberland
Gap, Tenn.

14. The privateer schooner Neva, from China, was seized at San
Francisco, Cal., by Capt. Pease, of U. S. cutter Mary.

14. Lieut. J. H. Rigby, with 20 men of the Gist Artillery, on an
expedition from Salisbury, Md., to Wilmington and Newcastle, Md., seized
3 brass 6-pounders and 100 muskets, in possession of secessionists in
those places.

14. The Gov. of Florida, by proclamation, forbade the enlistment of
citizens of that State to serve in any other portion of the Confederacy.

14. $30,000 had been raised by Southern people for the widow of “the
martyr Jackson,” who killed Col. Ellsworth, at Alexandria, Va.

14. Gen. Benham, in pursuit of the army of Gen. Floyd, in W. Va.,
overtook the rear guard near McCoy’s Mills, and defeated it, killing 15
rebels, among them Col. Croghan. Floyd, in his retreat, destroyed 200 of
his tents, and lost 10 wagon loads of ammunition and arms.

14. Fast day was observed in the rebel States.

14. Steamship Champion arrived at New York from Aspinwall, bringing Gen.
Sumner and several companies of regular soldiers from San Francisco,
having under arrest ex-Senators Gwin and Brent, and C. Benham, late
Attorney General of California, charged with complicity with the rebels.

16. A party of 57 of the N. Y. 30th, attached to Gen. Keyes’ brigade on
the Potomac, while out foraging west of Upton’s Hill, Va., were betrayed
and surrounded by 200 rebel cavalry, and one-half their number, with the
teams and wagons, captured.

16. 50 wagons and 500 oxen, with the teamsters and stores, were captured
near Pleasant Hill, Cass co., Mo., by the rebels.

16. 68 Federal prisoners, the crews of fishing smacks captured off the
Florida coast, were taken to Tallahassee, Fla.

17. Union troops under Col. Alcorn, defeated Hawkins’ regiment at
Cypress Bridge, McClean co., Ky., routing them with severe loss, and
taking 25 prisoners, 300 horses, etc. Federal loss, 10 killed, 15
wounded.

17. A party of Union troops recaptured nearly all the wagons and cattle
seized the day before near Pleasant Hill, Mo.

17. U. S. gunboat Connecticut captured British schooner Adelaide, with
military stores and supplies for rebels, near Cape Canaveral, and took
her into Key West.

17. Lieut. G. W. Snyder, U. S. A., a valuable engineer officer, died at
Washington, of typhoid fever.

17. The 3d Missouri cavalry routed a large number of rebels near
Palmyra, Mo., while on their way to join Price’s army, killing 3,
wounding 5, taking 16 prisoners.

18. The rebel Congress met at Richmond, Va., Howell Cobb, of Ga., in the
chair.

18. Capt. A. H. Foote was appointed Flag-officer of the fleet of the
Western Military Department.

18. Gen. Halleck assumed charge of the Missouri Department, _vice_ Gen.
Hunter.

18. Information was received at Washington of the imposition practised
upon the Indians west of Arkansas, by Albert Pike, rebel Commissioner.

18. Rebel troops in Accomac and Northampton cos., Va., disbanded, and
Union troops, under Gen. Lockwood, seized their arms and took possession
of the peninsula.

18. 150 rebels were taken prisoners by Federal cavalry, near
Warrensburg, Mo.

19. Missouri rebel legislature, at Neosha, Newton co., passed an
ordinance of secession.

19. N. Y. ship Harvey Birch was captured and burnt in the British
channel by the rebel steamer Nashville.

19. The principal part of Warsaw, capital of Benton co., Mo., was burnt
by rebels.

19. Lieut. Worden, U.S.N., held prisoner by the rebels, was exchanged
for Lieut. Short, of the Confederate army.

19. U. S. gunboat Conestoga engaged rebel batteries on the Tennessee
river, and silenced them, receiving but slight damage herself.

19. First flotilla of the “Stone Fleet” sailed for the South, from Conn.
and Mass.

20. Col. Burchard, with Lieut. Gregg and 24 men, attacked a large
company of rebels under Capts. Hays and Gregg, near Kansas City, Mo.,
and defeated them, killing 5 and wounding 8. The Col. and Lieut. were
slightly wounded.

20. A special Committee from the Virginia State Convention to consider
proposed amendments to the State Constitution, reported in opposition to
free schools and free suffrage for poor whites.

20. Secession State Convention at Russelville, Ky., adopted an ordinance
of secession, and appointed Commissions to the rebel government.

22. Two U. S. gunboats, Cambridge and Hertzel, from Fortress Monroe,
shelled out the camps of the 2d Louisiana and 10th Georgia regiments, at
the junction of James and Warwick rivers.

22. Fort Pickens opened fire on the rebel encampments and forts, near
Pensacola, Fla., which was replied to by them, and a severe cannonade
ensued for two days. Much damage was experienced by Fort McRae, the Navy
Yard, and town of Warrington—loss of life slight on either side. The U.
S. fleet in the harbor took part. The Richmond was badly damaged by a
shot. 1 killed, 6 wounded at Fort Pickens: 1 killed, 7 wounded on the
Richmond.

23. The Confederate gunboat Tuscorora accidentally took fire and was
destroyed on the Mississippi, near Helena, Ark.

24. An explosion took place at Fort Pickens, Fla., by the careless
handling of a shell, by which 5 men were killed, and 7 wounded.

24. A skirmish in Lancaster, Mo., between 450 Federals under Col. Moore,
and 420 rebels commanded by Lieut.-Col. Blanton. The rebels were routed
with the loss of 13 killed, and many wounded and prisoners. Union loss,
1 killed and 2 wounded.

24. Tybee Island, in Savannah harbor, was occupied by U. S. forces under
Flag-officer Dupont.

24. Rebel Commissioners Mason and Slidell were imprisoned in Fort
Warren, Mass.

25. Col. Bayard with the 1st Pa. Cavalry made a reconnoissance from
Langley to Dranesville, Va., and in a skirmish killed 2 and captured 4
rebels. 3 or 4 were wounded. 6 secessionists were also arrested. 2 of
the Cavalry were wounded.

25. Com. Tatnall, with 3 steamers and a gunboat, attacked the Federal
fleet in Cockspur Roads, Ga., but withdrew without injury, after 40 or
50 shots were exchanged.

25. The State of Missouri, as represented by the late Governor Jackson
and the Commissioners from the rebel members of the Legislature, was
unanimously received by the Richmond Congress as a member of the
Confederacy.

26. The house of Mr. Bell, near Franklin, Tenn., was attacked by an
armed party of rebels, the building fired, and the inmates, some 10 or
12, all killed or burned but two, who escaped.

26. Skirmish at Black Oak Point, Hickory co., Mo. Capt. Cosgrove and
Lieut. Bobbitt, with 25 men, surprised a rebel camp, killed 5, captured
8, and took 75 tents, 6 wagons, 10 horses, 35 guns, and other property,
and released 6 loyal prisoners.

26. A squadron of the 3d Pa. Cavalry, near Vienna, Va., were attacked on
three sides by a superior force of cavalry and infantry, and retreated
after a short engagement. 29 of their men were missing.

26. The Convention to form a new State in W. Va., met at Wheeling.

27. Federal troops, from Gen. Sherman’s command, visited Bear Island and
Edisto Island, near the mouth of the Ashepoo river, S. C.

27. Henry R. Jackson was appointed a Maj.-Gen. in the Georgia army.

27. Gen. McClellan appointed the hour of 11 each Sabbath for religious
worship throughout the U. S. army, and directed that all officers and
men off duty should have opportunity to attend.

27. Transport Constitution sailed from Fortress Monroe to Ship Island,
Mississippi Sound, with a portion of Gen. Butler’s expedition, under
Brig.-Gen. Phelps.

28. Capts. Robb and White, and Lieut. Moonlight, three U. S. officers,
were captured from the railway train at Weston, Mo., by Sy. Gordon.

28. S. C. planters on the seaboard burnt their cotton, to prevent its
capture by the Federal forces or the coast.

29. The English Government forbade temporarily the exportation of
cotton.

29. Major Hough, with 4 companies of Missouri cavalry, in defence of the
Sedalia railway train, had an engagement at Black Walnut Creek, Mo., in
which 17 rebels were killed and wounded, and 5 taken prisoners. 5 of the
cavalry, including the Major, were wounded.

29. Col. De Kay, Maj. Sharpf and other Federal officers, and 40 men, had
a skirmish about a mile beyond New Market, Va., in which the rebels were
routed, leaving 2 dead, and carrying off their wounded.

=Dec. 1.= The U. S. steamer Penguin arrived at Brooklyn with the prize
“Albion,” captured while attempting to run the blockade at Charleston,
S. C., with arms, ammunition, provisions, &c., worth $100,000.

1. A party of Federals attacked the rebel pickets at Morristown, E.
Tenn., killing a large number and putting the rest to flight.

1. Skirmish near Hunter’s Chapel, Va., between a squadron of Gen.
Blenker’s horsemen and a squadron of rebel cavalry, who were defeated,
losing 3 or 4 killed and wounded, and 2 prisoners. 1 Federal killed.

2. The first regular session of the 37th Congress commenced at
Washington.

2. A party of citizens in Mo., near Dunksburg, 20 miles west of Sedalia,
attacked a body of rebels under Capts. Young and Wheatley, killing 7 and
wounding 10 of them. Several citizens slightly wounded.

3. Skirmish at Salem, Dent co., Mo. A party of Federal soldiers,
commanded by Maj. Bowen, were surprised and fired on, while sleeping in
a house near headquarters, by 300 rebels under Cols. Freeman and Turner,
and 15 killed and wounded. The main body of the Federals were drawn out
by Maj. Bowen, who attacked the rebels in turn and drove them from the
town. 1 Federal killed and 4 wounded. Rebel loss unknown.

3. H. C. Burnett of Ky. and J. W. Reed of Mo. were expelled from U. S.
House of Representatives as traitors.

4. Col. Taylor with 30 men of the 3d New Jersey had a skirmish with a
number of rebel cavalry near Annandale, Va., three or four of whom were
captured, and several killed and wounded without Federal loss.

4. Gen. Phelps, with 2,000 men, attached to Gen. Butler’s expedition,
occupied Ship Island, Mississippi Sound.

4. A detachment of Federal cavalry surprised the rebel guard at
Whip-poor-will Bridge, on the Memphis Branch railway, Ky., taking 11
prisoners. 5 or 6 Confederates were killed or wounded. 4 Federals were
wounded.

4. J. C. Breckinridge was expelled from the U. S. Senate.

5. Reports of the Secs. of War and Navy show the Government had in
service for the war 682,971 men.

5. Skirmish at Brownsville, Ky. 100 Home Guards defeated a superior
rebel force under Gen. T. C. Hindman, of Ark. Rebel loss, 3 killed, 5
wounded; the Guards sustaining no loss.

5. Successful foray of the 13th Mass., Col. Leonard, from the Potomac to
Berkley Springs, Va., capturing a large quantity of provisions.

5. Riot at Nashville, Tenn., occasioned by the attempt of the rebel
authorities to enforce the endraftment of the militia. Two persons were
killed and several wounded.

7. At Sedalia, Mo., 106 mule teams and the teamsters were seized by
rebels.

7. Capt. Sweeney, with 35 rebel guerrillas, were captured near Glasgow,
Mo., by Capt. Merrill’s cavalry.

7. Skirmish near Dam No. 5 on the Potomac. Rebels driven off, losing 12
men.

7. Skirmish near Olathe, Mo. 2 Federals killed. 3 rebels killed and 5
wounded.

8. Capt. McGuire’s company of 27th Mo., captured 14 rebels at Sedalia,
Mo.

8. U. S. steamer Augusta captured schr. E. Waterman, loaded with
provisions, coal and war munitions, off Savannah, Ga.

9. Gen. Halleck required all municipal officers at St. Louis, Mo., as
well as State officials, to subscribe to the oath of allegiance
prescribed by the State Convention in October previous.

9. The U. S. steamer Harriet Lane, and 6 steamers attached to the upper
Potomac flotilla, shelled the woods at Budd’s Ferry, and exchanged shots
with the rebel batteries opposite, at Shipping Point. Some large
buildings, containing rebel stores, were burnt, by boatmen from the
Jacob Bell and Anacosta.

9. Gov. Pickens of S. C. proclaimed the State invaded, by land and sea,
and called for 12,000 twelve-month volunteers.

9. A detachment of the “Stone Fleet” left New Bedford, Mass., for a
southern port.

9. Garret Davis was elected a senator from Ky., in place of J. C.
Breckinridge.

9. The rebel Congress “admitted” Kentucky to the Confederacy.

11. Federal troops, under Lieut.-Col. Rhodes, had a skirmish near
Bertrand, Mo., losing 1 man. They took 16 prisoners and a number of
horses and fire-arms.

11. Five vessels of the Stone Fleet, and the ships George Green and
Bullion, of Gen. Butler’s expedition, sailed from Boston, Mass.

11. Skirmish at Dam No. 4, on the Potomac, near Sharpsburg, Md. Seven
rebels on the Virginia shore were killed, and many wounded. Capt.
Williams and 6 men having crossed the river were captured by the rebels.

11. Great fire at Charleston, S. C. 600 houses destroyed.

12. A squad of men from Col. Whitaker’s regiment were defeated in an
attempt to arrest secessionists near Bagdad, Shelby co., Ky., and
retreated with one wounded.

12. Col. Merrill’s cavalry regiment returned to Sedalia, Mo., from
Waverley, bringing as prisoners 4 rebel capts., 2 lieuts. and 40 men, a
mortar, and many horses.

12. Co. I, of 15th Ohio, were attacked on the banks of the Green river,
Ky., by a superior force of rebel cavalry, whom they repulsed, wounding
several of the cavalry, without loss themselves.

13. Villages of Papinsville and Butler, Bates co., Mo., rebel
rendezvous, were burned by Maj. Williams of the 3d Kansas.

13. Wm. H. Johnson, of the Lincoln Cavalry, a deserter, who was
captured, under military order was shot.

13. The British ship Admiral was captured off Savannah, Ga., while
attempting to run in, by the Augusta.

13. Rebel Gov. Jackson, of Mo., issued a proclamation, from New Madrid,
praising the valor, fortitude and success of the rebel army, and calling
for more volunteers.

13. Battle of Camp Alleghany, Va. 2,000 Federal troops, under Brig.-Gen.
R. H. Milroy, marched from Cheat Mountain Summit to attack a rebel camp
on Alleghany Summit, of 2,000 troops, under Col. E. Johnson. The
Federals approached in 2 divisions, of 750 each, from different
directions, but did not arrive simultaneously, and alternately attacked
the whole rebel force. They retired after a well contested fight of 8
hours, losing 20 killed, 107 wounded, and 10 missing. The rebels
reported about the same loss.

14. Ex-minister Faulkner was released on parole, to be exchanged for
Congressman Ely.

14. Reconnoissance by Federal troops, within 28 miles of Charleston, S.
C. The rebels, as they retreated, burnt their cotton.

15. Skirmish on the Virginia shore, opposite Berlin, Md. A detachment
from the 28th Penn. were attacked by 120 rebels in ambush, but cut their
way through to their boat, and escaped, having 1 wounded, and 2 taken
prisoners. 2 of the enemy were killed and 5 wounded.

15. Many Union refugees escaped from Arkansas. Capt. Ware, late of the
Ark. Legislature, organized a military company of Ark. Union men at
Rolla, Mo.

16. Platte City, Mo., was fired by rebels, and the principal public
buildings destroyed.

16. The _Europa_ arrived from England, with news of the excitement among
the British people occasioned by the arrest of Messrs. Mason and
Slidell, and also the ultimatum of the British Government, demanding a
surrender of the rebel commissioners, and an apology for their seizure.
Mr. Seward’s dispatch to Mr. Adams, dated Nov. 30, having settled the
matter in anticipation, there was but little excitement in the public
mind.

16. Gen. Zollicoffer established a camp on the banks of the Cumberland
river, six miles from Somerset, Ky.

16. A party of 8 men from the 2d and 4th N. J. advanced to Annandale, on
the south bank of the Potomac. They were surprised by the enemy and 3 of
them captured.

17. Battle at Munfordsville, Green river, Ky. The rebels defeated; 33
killed and 60 wounded. Federal loss, 10 killed and 17 wounded.

17. Gen. Pope captured 300 rebels near Osceola, Mo.

17. Entrance to the harbor at Savannah, Ga., blockaded by sinking 7
vessels laden with stone.

18. A part of Gen. Pope’s forces under Col. J. C. Davis and Col. F.
Steele, surprised a rebel camp near Milford, north of Warrensburg, Mo.,
and captured nearly 1300 men, 70 wagons loaded with stores, and all
their camp equipage and arms. Federal loss, 2 killed, 17 wounded.

18. Gen. Barnard, Chief-engineer of the U. S. army, reported to Congress
that the defences around Washington consisted of 48 works, the perimeter
of which was 48 miles, mounting above 300 guns.

18. The Island City sailed from Boston for Fortress Monroe with 240
rebel prisoners, to be exchanged.

18. Rebel Gen. Jackson attempted a movement against Williamsport, Md.,
but Gen. Williams being on the alert, the rebel force retired.

18. News from Ky., that Gen. McCook, was at Munfordsville, Gen. Mitchell
at Bacon Creek, and Gen. Zollicoffer, (rebel) at Cumberland river, near
Mill Springs.

19. Skirmishing at Point of Rocks, Md. Rebels from Va. shore commenced
shelling the encampment of Col. Geary’s Pennsylvania regiment, but were
repulsed after half an hour’s fight, without loss on the Federal side.

19. A band of 25 rebels visited the town of Ripley, Jackson Co., Va.,
and seized all the arms in the place, some ammunition and clothing. They
also robbed the post-office and the principal store in the place.

20. George W. Jones, late U. S. Minister to Bogota, was arrested in New
York on a charge of treason.

20. Battle of Dranesville, Va. Federal forces, under Gen. E. O. C. Ord,
defeated about 2,800 Confederates from South Carolina, Alabama, and
Virginia. Federal force about 4,000 men, of whom 7 were killed and 61
wounded. Rebel loss, 75 killed 150 wounded and 30 prisoners, together
with a large supply of forage.

20. A scouting party under Capt. Wood, captured 100 rebels near
Springfield, Mo., who were released upon taking the oath of allegiance.

20. A party of rebels from Gen. Price’s army committed extensive ravages
on the N. Missouri railway, between Hudson and Warrenton. The bridges,
wood-piles, water tanks, ties and rails were destroyed along the route
for 80 miles.

20. 103 Federal soldiers, under Major McKee, repulsed a superior force
of rebels four miles S. of Hudson, Mo., killing 10 and capturing 17
prisoners and 30 horses, at the same time rescuing a stock train which
had just been seized by the rebels.

20. The main ship channel at Charleston harbor, was obstructed by
sinking 16 vessels of the “stone fleet.”

22. Reconnoissance in the vicinity of Tybee Island and Broad river, Ga.,
from Gen. Sherman’s command.

22. Skirmish near New Market bridge, Newport News, Va. Two companies of
20th N. Y. regiment, under Major Schoepf, were attacked by 700 rebel
cavalry and infantry, and escaped with loss of 6 wounded. Ten of the
enemy were killed and a number wounded, when they retreated.

23. Gen. Pope sent an expedition to Lexington, Mo. Two boats of the
rebels were captured and burnt.

26. A skirmish took place at Camp Boyle, Columbia, Ky. A body of rebels
were attacked by a detachment of Col. Hazzard’s regiment, under Major
Ousley, who dispersed them, killing 5 and wounding others, without loss
themselves.

26. Gen. McCall sent a reconnoitering party towards Dranesville, Va.,
which was driven back by the rebels, who had a force of 10,000 men
there.

26. A Cabinet Council at Washington, decided to give up Mason and
Slidell, on the ground that they could not be held consistently with the
doctrine of neutral rights always maintained by the U. S. Government.

26. Gen. Scott arrived at New York, in the Arago, from France.

26. Bluffton, S. C., was occupied by Federal troops under Gen. Stevens.

26. The Lighthouse on Morris Island, Charleston, S. C. harbor, was blown
up by order of rebel authorities.

26. Major Gower, with a squadron of 1st Iowa cavalry, arrived at
Jefferson City, Mo., bringing as prisoners, 1 capt., 13 men, and 10
wagon loads of stores.

26. Philip St. George Cook, a Brig.-Gen. in the rebel army, shot
himself, at his residence in Powhatan Co., Va.

26. A fire occurred in the government stables at Washington, D. C., in
which nearly 200 horses were burned.

27. Lord Lyons, the British minister at Washington, was notified that
Mason and Slidell awaited his disposal.

27. Alfred Ely, U. S. representative from Rochester, N. Y., taken
prisoner at Manassas Plains, was released in exchange for C. J.
Faulkner.

27. The rebel privateer Isabel, ran the blockade off Charleston, S. C.

27. The bridges over Fabias river on the Palmyra railway, Mo., destroyed
by rebels.

28. Gen. Buell’s army in Ky., was reported by the War Department to
number 60,000 men.

28. The rebels at Bowling Green, Ky., were reported to number 30,000,
under Gens. A. S. Johnston, Buckner, and Hindman.

28. Gen. Prentiss, with 5 companies 3rd Missouri cavalry, under Col.
John Glover, and 5 companies of Col. Birge’s sharpshooters, 470 in all,
attacked a rebel camp at Mount Zion, in Boone Co., Mo., numbering nearly
900 men. The rebels were routed, losing 25 killed, 150 wounded, and 40
prisoners. 90 of their horses and 105 stand of arms were captured. The
Federal loss was 3 killed and 46 wounded.

28. A squadron of Federal cavalry, from Col. Jackson’s regiment,
commanded by Major Murray, left their camp near Calhoun, Ky., on a
scouting expedition across Green river. They were attacked near
Sacramento, by a large force of rebels under Col. De Forrest, and after
a short engagement compelled to retire. Capt. A. G. Bacon was killed,
and Lieut. R. H. King, of Frankfort, and 8 privates wounded. Capt.
Merriweather and two privates of the rebels were killed, and a number
wounded.

30. The rebel Gen. H. H. Sibley having entered New Mexico with a
military force without opposition, took possession of it, and annexed it
to the Southern Confederacy by proclamation.

30. Messrs. Thomas and Burnett, of Ky., were “qualified” and took their
seats in the rebel Congress at Richmond, Va.

31. Two boats under Acting Masters A. Allen, and H. L. Sturges, from the
U. S. steamer, Mount Vernon, destroyed a light ship off Wilmington,
N.C., which the rebels had fitted up for a gunboat. The expedition was
at night, and the boats were under fire from Fort Caswell, but escaped
injury.

31. Capt. Shillinglaw and Mason, N. Y. 79th, and Lieutenants Dickinson,
3rd U. S. infantry, J. W. Hart, 20th Indiana, and other officers and men
were released by the rebels from Richmond, Va.

31. Capture of the town of Biloxi, Miss, by U. S. gunboats Lewis, Water
Witch, and New London, with national forces from Ship Island. The town
and fort surrendered without a fight. The guns were removed by Commander
Smith, and the Federals retired.


  =1862.=

=Jan. 1.= The rebel Commissioners Mason and Slidell, with their
Secretaries, left Boston for England, via Provincetown, Mass., where the
British war steamer Rinaldo received them.

1. Col. H. Brown opened fire from Fort Pickens on the rebel vessels and
fortifications within range of his guns, which was returned by the
enemy.

1. The British bark Empress arrived at New York as a prize, with 6,500
bags of coffee, captured by the U. S. sloop-of-war Vincennes, off New
Orleans bar.

1. Part of the Louisville and Nashville railway was destroyed by order
of the rebel Gen. Buckner.

1. Skirmish at Port Royal Ferry, S. C. Federal troops under Gen.
Stevens, with the assistance of five gunboats, crossed from Beaufort to
the mainland and attacked batteries erected by the rebels, who retreated
towards Grahamville. Federal loss, 3 killed, 11 wounded. Rebels, 6
killed, 12 wounded.

1. Jeff. Owens, Col. Jones, and 50 rebel bridge-burners were captured
near Martinsburg, Adrian Co., Mo., by State militia under General
Schofield.

1. Four Federal soldiers were captured, 1 killed, and 10 guns taken by a
party of rebels on Green river, Ky., near Morgantown.

2. The U. S. gunboats Yankee and Anacosta, exchanged shots with the
rebel batteries at Cockpit Point, on the Potomac.

2. Daniel P. White of Ky., qualified and took his seat in the
Confederate Congress.

3. Col. Glover, with 300 Federal troops, attacked a rebel camp 9 miles
N. of Hunnewell, Mo., taking 8 prisoners, putting the rest to flight,
and capturing a quantity of arms, &c.

3. 240 released Federal prisoners arrived at Fortress Monroe from
Richmond.

4. The 84th Pa., 39th Ill., 500 cavalry and other troops were driven
from Bath, Va., by a superior rebel force under Gen. Jackson, who took
30 Federals prisoners. The Federals retreated to Hancock, Md. 7 rebels
were killed and a number wounded. 3 of the Federals were killed, several
wounded.

4. Skirmish at Huntersville, W. Va. A portion of the 25th Ohio, 2d Va.,
and Bracken’s Ind. cavalry, all under Major Webster, attacked a rebel
force of 400 cavalry and 350 infantry who were guarding the rebel
supplies at that depot. They were routed with a loss of 2 killed and 7
wounded, leaving $50,000 worth of army stores which were destroyed by
Unionists.

5. Skirmish on the mainland near Port Royal, S. C. 7 rebels were
captured.

5. Rebel army under Gen. Jackson bombarded Hancock, Md. from the
opposite Va. shore, but were driven away by artillery forces under Gen.
Lander without a close engagement.

5. Five Federal soldiers were killed by rebels in ambush in Johnson Co.,
Kansas.

6. 4,000 Cherokee Indians were driven from their homes by Texas rebels.

7. Destruction of bridges and culverts on the Balt. and Ohio railway,
near the Cacapon river, by rebel Gen. Jackson.

7. Engagement at Blue’s Gap, near Romney, W. Va. Federal troops under
Col. Dunning, of the 5th Ohio, attacked 2,000 of the enemy, routing them
with the loss of 15 killed, 20 prisoners, 2 pieces of cannon, their
wagons, &c. No Federal loss.

7. 300 of the 32d Ohio, under Capt. Lacey, were sent by Gen. Milroy into
Tucker Co., Va., where they dispersed 400 rebels, capturing 2 officers
and a private, and a large quantity of stores. 4 rebels were found dead
and many were wounded.

7. Three brigades of Gen. Smith’s division, S. side of the Potomac,
proceeded toward Peacock Hill, Lewinsville, Fairfax Court House and
Vienna, and captured an immense quantity of hay, oats, corn, &c.

7. A band of rebels having seized a quantity of army stores from the
depot at Sutton, Braxton Co., W. Va., information was sent to Col. H.
Anisansel, commanding 1st Virginia Cavalry, at Clarksburg. The Col.
overtook the rebels 30 miles E. of Sutton, and, attacking them, killed
or wounded 22, took 15 horses and 56 head of cattle, and recaptured the
greater part of the stores.

7. Skirmish at Paintsville, near Prestonburg, Ky. Col. Garfield
dispersed 2,500 rebels under Humphrey Marshall, killing 3, wounding a
large number, and capturing 15. Federal loss 2 killed and 1 wounded.

8. The newspapers of Missouri were put under military censorship, and
their editors ordered to send two copies of each issue to the
Provost-Marshal.

8. Riot at Warsaw, Mo. Two secessionists were shot.

8. Reconnoissance of gunboats towards Savannah, Ga., under command of
Capt. Davis.

8. Capt. Latham and 17 men of 2d Virginia regiment, encountered about 30
rebel guerrillas on the Dry Fork of Cheat river, W. Va., and after a
severe fight of an hour’s duration, the rebels were driven from the
field with the loss of 6 killed and several wounded. Federal loss 6
wounded. Capt. Latham destroyed the rebel tents and provisions.

8. The 1st Kansas regiment, on its march from Sedalia to Lexington, Mo.,
was fired upon from ambush, and a sergeant and 2 horses killed.

8. A. W. Bradford was inaugurated as Governor of Maryland, and made an
eloquent address, expressing in the strongest terms devotion to the
Union and the Constitution.

8. Major W. M. G. Torrence of the 1st Iowa cavalry, assisted by
detachments of the 1st Missouri cavalry, Major Hubbard, 4th Ohio and
Merrill’s Horse, in all 500 mounted men, attacked a rebel camp at Silver
Creek, Howard Co., Mo., where six or eight hundred men were stationed,
under Col. Poindexter. The enemy were routed with a loss of 12 killed,
22 wounded, and 15 prisoners, leaving their horses, guns, and camp and
garrison equipage. The material was destroyed by Major Torrence. Federal
loss 3 killed and 10 wounded.

9. A division of the Chamber of Commerce at St. Louis, Mo., was
occasioned by disloyal sentiments. A new and loyal Chamber was formed.

10. A reconnoitering force of 5,000 men under the command of Brig. Gen.
McClernand, left Cairo, Ill., and proceeded toward Columbus and
Mayfield.

10. Waldo P. Johnson and Trusten Polk, U. S. Senators from Missouri,
were expelled from the Senate for disloyalty.

10. Skirmish at Pohick Church, Va. The 5th Michigan dispersed a body of
rebels.

10. Skirmish at Bath, Va., between a detachment of Federals under Capt.
Russell and rebels from Gen. Jackson’s division.

10. Battle near Prestonburg, Ky. Gen. Garfield, with 1,500 Federal
troops, overtook Humphrey Marshall with 3,000 rebels, compelling him to
destroy his stores and putting him to flight. Rebel loss 50 killed many
wounded and 25 prisoners. Federal loss, 2 killed, 25 wounded.

11. The 1st Kansas regiment arrived at Lexington, Mo., and arrested
several prominent rebels. They also seized a large quantity of stores
designed for the use of Gen. Price.

11. Fifty rebels belonging to Col. Alexander’s regiment were captured 6
miles from Sedalia, Mo.

12. The Burnside Expedition sailed from Fortress Monroe, under command
of Com. Goldsborough and Gen. Burnside, for Albemarle Sound, N. C.

12. Secretary Seward telegraphed the British Consul at Portland, Me.,
that British troops might pass through U. S. territory on their way to
Canada.

12. The rebels in Kentucky burned the houses, and carried off or
destroyed the property of loyal men at Horse Cave and in Cave City and
vicinity, and the people sought refuge at Munfordsville.

13. Hon. Simeon Cameron, Secretary of War, resigned his position, and
Edwin F. Stanton was appointed in his stead on the 15th inst.

13. The steamship Constitution, with the Maine 12th regiment, and the
Bay State regiment, sailed from Boston for Ship Island, Miss., via.
Fortress Monroe.

15. Gen. McClernand’s column advanced to Mayfield, Ky., and Gen. Grant
to Fort Jefferson. 20,000 rebels reported at Columbus, Ky., under Gen.
Polk.

16. Hon. Edwin B. Stanton, the new Secretary of War, assumed the duties
of his office.

17. 150 wounded Federal prisoners arrived at Fortress Monroe from
Richmond, Va. Eight rebel officers were released from the Fortress the
same day.

17. Capture of British schooner Stephen Hart, loaded with arms,
ammunition and stores for the rebels, by the U. S. storeship Supply.

17. Ex-President John Tyler died at Richmond, Va.

17. Skirmish near Ironton, Mo. Rebels under Jeff. Thompson were defeated
by Col. Miles.

17. Two companies of the 1st Kansas cavalry, under Major Halderman,
arrested Capt. Whitney, Joe Shelby and several other rebel officers, and
also recovered a number of horses, mules, wagons, etc., taken from Col.
Mulligan’s command at Lexington, Mo.

17. The Fortification Bill passed the U. S. House of Representatives,
appropriating $5,960,000 for fort and harbor defences.

18. Gen. Grant made a reconnoissance in force towards Columbus, Ky.

18. Gen. Halleck levied an assessment on the wealthy secessionists of
St. Louis, Mo., to provide for the wants of loyal refugees in the city
who had been driven from their homes in the S. W. section of the State
by rebels.

18. Capts. Murdock and Webster, with their commands, returned to Cairo
from an expedition to Bloomfield, Mo. They captured Lieut. Col. Farmer
and 11 other rebel officers and 68 privates, with a quantity of army
stores.

19. Battle of Mill Spring, Ky. The rebels completely routed, with loss
of 192 killed, and 140 prisoners. Gen. Zollicoffer, their commander, was
killed. The Federal troops were under Gen. Thomas. 1,200 horses and
mules, over 100 large wagons, and 14 cannon, 2,000 muskets, etc., were
captured. Federal loss 39 killed, 207 wounded.

19. The U. S. gunboat Itasca captured the rebel schooner Lizzie Weston,
off Florida, laden with 293 bales of cotton, 152,500 pounds, for
Jamaica.

23. The property of several wealthy secessionists at St. Louis was
seized under execution by Gen. Halleck, and sold to pay the assessment
to support Union refugees.

23. The second stone fleet was sunk in Maffit’s Channel, Charleston, S.
C., harbor.

24. The Federal light boat off Cape Henry, at the mouth of the
Chesapeake, went ashore and was captured by the rebels, with its crew of
7 men.

24. Two rebel vessels laden with cotton, while attempting to pass the
blockade at the mouth of the Mississippi, ran aground, were deserted and
burned. The fire was extinguished on board the Calhoun and that vessel
captured.

26. The Burnside Expedition reached Pamlico Sound.

26. A military Commission at Palmyra, Mo., sentenced 7 bridge-burners to
be shot.

28. Federal troops occupied Lebanon, Mo.

28. Rev. Bishop Ames and Hon. Hamilton Fish, of N. Y., were appointed by
Secretary of War Stanton to visit the U. S. prisoners in captivity at
Richmond, Va., to devise means for providing for their comfort. The
Commissioners were not allowed to visit Richmond, but they opened
negotiations for the exchange of prisoners.

28. Skirmish between 50 men of the 37th N. Y. regiment under Lieut.-Col.
Burke, and a body of Texas rangers near Colchester, on the Occoquan
river, Va., in which 9 rebels were killed. Two Federals were killed, and
2 wounded.

29. The iron-clad battery Monitor was launched at Greenpoint, N. Y.

29. Reconnoissance on either side of the Savannah river from the Federal
fleet at Port Royal, through the Wilmington Narrows and Wall’s Cut, by
which the feasibility of cutting off Fort Pulaski from communication
with Savannah was demonstrated.

30. Gen. Beauregard took command of rebel troops in Tennessee.

30. The rebel commissioners, Mason and Slidell, arrived at Southampton,
England.

30. Rebels under Capt. John Morgan, seized six Union men at a church
near Lebanon, Ky. They set fire to the church, and attempted to burn one
of the prisoners in the flames, who effected his escape.

31. An order from the Secretary of State released all civilians who were
captured on board vessels attempting to violate the blockade.

31. Five telegraph operators were captured by the rebels near
Campbellsville, Ky.

31. Queen Victoria declared her determination to observe strict
neutrality during the American contest, and to prevent the use of
English vessels and harbors to aid the belligerents.

=Feb. 1.= The 2d Cavalry, 41st Indiana, had a skirmish near Bowling
Green, Ky., in which 3 rebels were killed and 2 wounded. No loss on the
Federal side.

1. The Spanish steamer Duero arrived at Liverpool, England, from Cadiz,
bringing as passengers Captains Minott, of the Vigilant; Smith of the
Arcade, and Hoxie, of the Eben Dodge—three American vessels which had
been burned by the privateer Sumter.

1. An octavo volume of 1,100 pages was published as a report by a
Committee from the U. S. House of Representatives, appointed July, 1861,
to investigate frauds in Government contracts.

1. The President of the U. S. was empowered by act of Congress to take
possession of all the railway and telegraphic lines throughout the
country, whenever requisite for military purposes, till the close of the
rebellion.

1. An interesting conference was held by U. S. Commissioner Dole with
the loyal chiefs of the Seminole, Creek, Iowa, and Delaware Indians, in
which the warriors pledged themselves to conquer the rebel Indians who
had driven them from their homes.

2. A skirmish occurred in Morgan county, Penn., between a body of rebel
cavalry, under Lieut.-Col. White, and a company of Federal infantry,
under Captain Duncan, in which the Federals were defeated, with a loss
of seven men.

2. 386 rank and file and 11 officers, rebel prisoners, were sent to
Fortress Monroe, from Boston harbor, to be exchanged for an equal number
of Federal prisoners.

3. The privateersmen confined in the City Prison, N. Y., were
transferred to Fort Lafayette, and there held as political prisoners.

3. In conformity with the decision of the British Ministry, the
privateer Nashville was sent off from Southampton, England, and the U.
S. gunboat Tuscarora detained from pursuing her for the space of 24
hours.

3. A flag of truce from the rebels to Gen. McDowell, brought a document
from Jeff. Davis to President Lincoln, threatening to hang Cols.
Corcoran, Lee, and others, prisoners in their hands, in retaliation,
should the punishment of death be inflicted on the bridge-burners who
had been convicted in Missouri.

3. The Federal army under Gen. Grant were within 3 miles of Fort Henry,
on the Tennessee river.

4. Capt. Lowing, with 80 men from Cos. F and H, Third Michigan,
encountered a body of rebels near Occoquan, Va., whom they dispersed. 4
of the rebels were shot. No loss sustained by the Federals.

4. A scouting party under Capt. Harkness, of Col. Miles’ 81st Pa.
regiment, returned from the vicinity of Fairfax Court House, Va.,
bringing several rebel prisoners.

4. Steamship Constitution, with the Mass. Bay State, and the Maine 12th
regiments, and other troops, under Gen. Phelps, left Fortress Monroe for
Ship Island, Miss.

5. Attack on Fort Henry, Tenn. commenced by Federal gunboats under Com.
Foote.

5. Queen Victoria, of England, removed the prohibitions relating to the
export of material of war from the British dominions declared on the
30th Nov. and 4th Dec., 1861.

6. Jesse D. Bright, of Indiana, was expelled from the U. S. Senate, for
complicity with treason.

7. A band of rebels concealed near the landing at Harper’s Ferry, Va.,
having, by means of a flag of truce, decoyed a boat from the Maryland
shore, and then fired on its occupants, by order of Col. Geary, the
block of large buildings facing the landing were burned. But seven
families, 40 persons in all, then resided in the town.

7. Unconditional surrender of Fort Henry to Com. Foote, with Gen.
Tilghman and staff, one colonel, two captains, and 80 privates. Com.
Foote transferred the fort to Gen. Grant.

7. Federal troops took possession of the Memphis and Ohio railway.

7. The rebels driven from Romney, Va., by Gen. Lander, who occupied the
town.

7. Successful skirmish with rebel cavalry near Fairfax Court House, Va.,
by Col. Friedman, with the Cameron Dragoons; 1 rebel killed, and 12
captured, with 12 horses, &c. 2 Federals wounded.

8. Portions of Gen. Butler’s expedition sailed from Boston and from
Fortress Monroe, for Ship Island, Miss.

8. Capture of rebel forts and garrisons on Roanoke Island, N. C., by the
Federal forces under Com. Goldsborough and Gen. Burnside. 2,500
prisoners, 6 forts, 40 guns, 3,000 small arms. Federal loss, 50 killed,
150 wounded.

8. Capt. Smith, of the 5th Virginia (loyal) with 21 men, surprised 32 of
Jenkins’ cavalry on Linn Creek, Logan County, Va., killing 8, wounding
7, and capturing the remainder, with 32 horses. One Federal was killed
and 1 wounded.

9. Skirmish of a body of Federal cavalry with rebels near Fort Henry,
Tenn. 5 rebels killed, and 30 taken prisoners.

9. Edenton, N. C., occupied by Federal troops.

10. Destruction of rebel gunboats in the Pasquotank river, N. C., also
of the rebel battery at Cobb’s Point, and the occupation of Elizabeth
City by Federal forces from 14 gunboats, commanded by Capt. Rowan.

10. Gen. Charles P. Stone, U. S. A., was arrested by Gov’t. order, and
imprisoned in Fort Lafayette.

10. Arrest of several male and female secessionists in Washington. Also,
of Dr. Ives, N. Y. _Herald_ correspondent.

10. Capt. Phelps, of Com. Foote’s squadron, commanding the gunboats
Conestoga, Taylor, and Lexington, captured a new rebel gunboat, and
destroyed all the rebel craft between Fort Henry and Florence, Ala.

11. Bursting of the “Sawyer” gun at Newport News, Va., by which 2
Federal soldiers were killed and 2 wounded.

12. An expedition under the command of Col. Reggin returned to Fort
Henry, Tenn., from up the Tennessee river, having captured $75,000 worth
of contraband goods at Paris, Tenn., and also the tents and camp
equipage of the rebel troops that retreated from Fort Henry.

13. Evacuation of Springfield, Mo., by the rebel army under Gen. Price.
Occupation of the town by Federal troops of Gen. Curtis’ army. 600 of
the rebel sick, and many forage wagons were left behind.

14. The rebel camp at Blooming Gap, Va., was surprised by forces under
Gen. Lander. 65 prisoners were taken, including 17 officers, and 13
killed and 20 wounded. Federal loss, 7 in killed and wounded.

14. Fort Donelson was invested and attacked by the Federal army under
Gen. Grant.

14. E. M. Stanton, Sec. of War, issued an order releasing all political
prisoners upon their taking an oath of allegiance.

14. A skirmish took place near Flat Lick Ford, on the Cumberland river,
Ky., between two companies of cavalry, under Col. Munday, two companies
of the 49th Indiana, and some rebel pickets, in which the latter lost 4
killed, 4 wounded, and 3 taken prisoners. There was no Federal loss.

14. Com. Foote, with 6 gunboats, attacked Fort Donelson, but was
repulsed, the Commodore being severely wounded. Federal loss 60 in
killed and wounded.

14. The rear guard of Gen. Price’s army in S. W. Missouri was attacked
by Gen. Curtis’ command, and many prisoners taken.

14. Bowling Green, Ky., was evacuated by rebel troops, who destroyed
most of the available property in the town that could not be removed.

14. Three rebel schooners and one sloop, laden with rice, were destroyed
by the crews of armed boats from the U. S. bark Restless, Lieut. E.
Conroy, in Bull’s Bay, S.C.

15. The national batteries at Venus Point, on the Savannah river, were
attacked by 4 rebel gunboats, which were repulsed, one of them being
severely injured.

15. The railway bridge crossing the Tennessee river at Decatur, Ala.,
was destroyed by Union men.

15. Gen. Burnside administered the oath of allegiance to the inhabitants
of Roanoke Island.

15. The iron-clad steam gunboat Galena was launched at Mystic, Conn.

16. Gen. Price was driven from Missouri by Gen. Curtis, who followed him
into Arkansas, capturing many prisoners.

16. Gen. Mitchell’s troops occupied Bowling Green, Ky.

16. Fort Donelson surrendered to the Federal army, under Gen. Grant,
after three days’ desperate resistance. 15,000 prisoners were captured,
including Brig.-Gen. Buckner, and an immense quantity of war material.
Gens. Floyd and Pillow escaped, with a portion of the garrison.

16. Destruction of the “Tennessee Iron works,” owned by John Bell and
Messrs. Lewis & Wood, on the Cumberland river, six miles above Dover, by
order of Com. Foote.

17. The First Missouri cavalry fell into an ambush of rebels at Sugar
Creek, Ark., by which 13 of their number were killed and wounded.

18. Gov. Rector of Arkansas, by proclamation, called every man subject
to military duty into service within 20 days.

18. First session of the Congress of the “permanent” Government of the
Confederate States opened at Richmond, Va.

18. The wire and suspension bridges over the Cumberland river at
Nashville, Tenn., were destroyed by Gen. Floyd, despite the
remonstrances of the citizens.

18. A skirmish at Independence, Mo., between a detachment of Ohio
cavalry and a band of rebels under Quantrel and Parker. 3 rebels killed,
several wounded and taken prisoners. 1 Federal killed, 3 wounded.

19. 1,000 additional rebel prisoners were taken at Fort Donelson, they
having come down the river to reinforce Gen. Buckner.

19. Evacuation of Clarksville, Tenn., by the rebels. The Federal forces,
under Com. Foote, took possession of the town, and captured a large
quantity of army stores.

19. Bentonville, Ark., was captured by Gen. Curtis, after a short
engagement with the rebels, in which more prisoners and supplies were
taken.

20. The rebel steamer Magnolia, with 1,050 bales of cotton, was captured
in the Gulf of Mexico, by the U. S. steamers Brooklyn and South
Carolina. An attempt to fire the vessel was frustrated by the Federal
seamen.

20. The town of Winton, N. C., was partially burned by the national
forces.

20. The track of the Memphis and Ohio railway was torn up, and the
bridges burned in many places, by order of rebel Gen. Polk.

21. Battle of Valvende, N. M. 1,500 Federals, under Col. Canby, were
defeated by an equal force of rebels, under Col. Steele. Federal loss,
55 killed, 140 wounded. Rebel loss, about the same.

22. Inauguration of Jefferson Davis, of Miss., as President of the
“Confederate States,” at Richmond, Va., and Alex. H. Stevens, of Ga., as
Vice President, they having received the unanimous vote of 109 delegates
representing 11 States, viz.: Ala., Ark., Fla., Ga., La., Miss., N. C.,
S. C., Tenn., Texas, Va., for the permanent organization of the
Confederate States.

22. The U. S. sloop-of-war Adironac was launched at Brooklyn, N. Y.

23. 347 released Federal prisoners arrived at Fortress Monroe, among
them Cols. Lee, Wood and Coggswell.

23. Lieut. Guin, of Com. Foote’s command, made a reconnoissance up the
Tenn. river as high as Eastport, Miss., being well received by the
inhabitants. At Clifton, Tenn., he took possession of 1500 sacks and
barrels of flour and 6,000 bush. of wheat.

23. Gallatin, Tenn., occupied by Gen. Buell’s forces.

23. A skirmish at Mason’s Neck, near Occoquan, Va., between Texas
rangers, and part of the N. Y. 37th, in which 2 of the latter were
killed and 1 wounded.

24. Harpers’ Ferry, Va., occupied by the 28th Pa. regiment.

25. Nashville, Tenn., was occupied by Federal forces of Gen. Buell’s
command.

25. The 9th Ohio and 2d Minnesota regiments received handsome flags from
ladies of Louisville, Ky., in compliment of their valor at Mill Spring,
Jan. 19.

25. The remainder of Gen. Bank’s division crossed the Potomac and
occupied Bolivar and Charlestown, Va.

25. All the telegraphic lines that could be used by government were
taken under military control, and the transmission of reports of
military operations forbidden, without permission of the military
censor.

26. Cotton and tobacco planters of Va., at a meeting held at Richmond,
refused to consent to the destruction of their crops.

26. The command of Capt. Montgomery, was surprised by a large force of
rebels at Keittsville, Barry Co., Mo. 2 Federals were killed, 1 wounded,
and 40 of their horses captured.

26. The U. S. gunboat R. B. Forbes ran ashore near Nag’s Head, N. C.,
was set on fire and destroyed.

27. Fayetteville, Ark., was occupied by Gen. Curtis, who captured a
number of prisoners, stores, &c. The rebels retreated across the Boston
Mountains.

27. 42 Federal soldiers were poisoned at Mud Town, Ark., by eating food
which had been left for them by rebels.

27. Col. Wood’s cavalry drove rebels out of Dent, Texas and Howell Cos.,
Mo., capturing 60 prisoners.

27. U. S. iron-clad battery Monitor, Lieut. Worden, sailed from N. York
for Fortress Monroe.

28. The British ship Labuan, with a valuable cargo, arrived at N. York,
captured by the U. S. sloop-of-war Portsmouth off Rio Grande river.

28. The rebel steamer Nashville ran the blockade of Beaufort, N. C., and
reached the town.

28. Capt. Nolen with 64 of the 7th Ill. cavalry attacked 90 of Jeff.
Thompson’s cavalry and a battery, west of Charlestown, Mo., and captured
4 guns, losing 1 man.

=March 1.= The U. S. gunboats Tyler, Lieut. Gwin, commanding, and
Lexington, Lieut. Shirk, on an expedition up the Tenn. river, engaged
and silenced a rebel battery at Pittsburg, Tenn., 7 miles above
Savannah.

1. Evacuation of Columbus Ky., by rebel troops, leaving their heavy
guns, and a large quantity of war material. 400 of the 2d Illinois
cavalry occupied the town next day, and troops from Com. Foote’s
flotilla the day after.

1. U. S. steamer Mount Vernon, captured the schooner British Queen, at
the blockade of Wilmington, N. C.

1. John Minor Botts, Valentine Hecker, Franklin Stearns, and others were
arrested at Richmond Va., on a charge of “treason.”

2. Death of Brig.-Gen. Lander, at Camp Chase, on the Upper Potomac, from
a wound received at Edwards’ Ferry Va., Oct. 22, 1861.

3. Brig.-Gens. S. B. Buckner and Lloyd Tilghman, rebel prisoners,
arrived at Fort Warren, Boston, Mass.

3. U.S. Senate confirmed Gens. McDowell, Buell Burnside, McClernand, C.
F. Smith, Lew. Wallace and Sigel as Maj.-Gens.; and Cols. Speed, of
Tenn., Logan of Ill., McArthur of Iowa, Lauman of Iowa, Wallace of Ind.,
McCook of Ohio, Berry of Maine, and Terry of Conn., as Brigadiers.

4. Occupation of Fort Clinch and Fernandina, Fla., and St. Mary’s and
Brunswick, Ga., by Federal forces under Com. Dupont and Gen. Wright.

4. A squadron of 1st Michigan cavalry surprised and defeated a party of
rebel cavalry at Berryville, Va., killing 3 and capturing 9 horses
without loss.

4. Two bridges on the Nashville and Decatur railway, Tenn., destroyed by
rebels.

5. Bunker Hill, Va., was occupied by rebel forces.

6. Two rebel officers were captured at Vienna, Va., by a detachment of
Col. Averill’s cavalry.

6 A rebel picket of 5 was captured by Van Alen’s cavalry near Bunker
Hill, Va.

7. Capt. Cole’s Maryland cavalry encountered a few of Ashby’s rebel
cavalry, near Winchester, Va., 6 rebels were killed and 5 wounded. Capt.
Cole had 3 men wounded.

6, 7, 8. Battle of Pea Ridge, Ark. The combined rebel forces under Gens.
Van Dorn, Price, McCulloch and Pike, were defeated by the Federal army
under Gens. Curtis, Sigel, Asboth and Davis. Federal loss in killed,
wounded and missing, 1351. The rebel loss about 2000. Gens. McCulloch,
McIntosh and Slack, were killed.

8. Destruction of the U. S. sloop-of-war Cumberland, and the frigate
Congress, in action with the rebel iron battery Merrimac, in Hampton
Roads, Va. 100 men were killed or drowned on the Cumberland.

8. By order of the President, Maj.-Gen. McClellan was directed to
organize and command the army of the Potomac, divided into 5 army corps,
under Maj. Gens. McDowell, Brig.-Gens. E. V. Sumner, S. P. Heintzelman,
E. L. Keyes and N. P. Banks.

8. Col. Geary entered Leesburg, Va., capturing many prisoners, stores,
&c.

8. Manassas, Va., was evacuated by the rebels.

9. Combat of the U. S. iron battery Monitor, and the rebel iron battery
Merrimac, in Hampton Roads, Va. After a desperate combat of 3 hours, the
Merrimac was compelled to retire, having received severe injuries.

9. The rebel battery at Cockpit Point, on the Potomac captured by
Federal troops.

9. Brilliant charge of 14 of the Lincoln cavalry at Burk’s station, near
Fairfax Court House, Va., against 100 infantry, 3 of whom were killed, 5
wounded and 11 captured. Lieut. Hidden was killed.

10. Lieut. O. Houston and 8 men of 2d Ohio battery was captured in S. W.
Mo. by Texas rangers.

10. Centreville, Va., was occupied by national forces, the bridges,
railway track, depot, &c. having been destroyed by rebels.

11. Gen. Pope’s troops occupied Point Pleasant, Mo., 8 miles below New
Madrid.

11. Berryville, Va., was occupied by Gen. Gorman, of Gen. Bank’s
division.

11. The country intervening between the Department of the Potomac and
that of the Mississippi, was organized as the “Mountain Department,” and
assigned to Gen. Fremont.

11. The “Department of the Miss.,” was organized and assigned to Gen.
Halleck, which included his previous department, and that of Gen.
Hunter’s in Kansas; also all of Gen. Buell’s west of Knoxville, Tenn.

11. Occupation of St. Augustine, Fla., by Federal naval forces under
Com. Rogers.

12. Winchester, Va., was occupied by national troops, who captured rebel
stores.

12. Curtis’s Iowa cavalry and a battalion of the 1st Nebraska, defeated
600 rebels and occupied Paris, Ky.

12. Occupation of Jacksonville, Fla., by Federal forces from the U. S.
gunboats Ottawa, Seneca, and Pembina, under command of Lieut. T. F.
Stevens.

13. Brunswick, Ga., was occupied by Federal forces under Flag-officer
Dupont.

14. The rebels driven from New Madrid, Mo., which was occupied by Gens.
Pope and Hamilton’s forces, who captured military stores valued at
$100,000. Federal loss during the siege 51 killed and wounded.

14. Battle of Newbern, N. C. Gen. Burnside’s forces attacked and carried
a continuous line of redoubts of half a mile in extent, after 4 hours’
engagement. The rebels in their retreat set fire to the town, which was
extinguished by the Federals with slight damage. 200 prisoners and 6
forts were taken, mounting 40 heavy guns. Federal loss, 39 killed, 150
wounded. Rebel loss, 50 killed, 200 wounded.

14. A detachment of Ohio and Indiana troops, under Col. Carter and
Lieut. Col. Keigwin, from their camp at Cumberland Ford, Ky., attacked
300 rebels on the Cumberland Mountains, and defeated them, killing 3,
wounding 6, and capturing 3 officers and 15 privates, 59 horses, 100
guns, 100 sabres and other material.

15. The Federal gunboats and mortars, under Com. Foote, began the
investment and assault of Island No. 10, on the Miss.

16. Two rebel captains and 17 privates were captured on Indian Creek,
Arkansas.

17. Federal forces in Va., under Gen. Shields, advanced from Winchester
and drove the enemy toward Strasburg.

18. The rebel fleet on the Mississippi at Island No. 10, attacked Com.
Foote’s flotilla, but retired after slight loss on either side, the
rebels crippling two of the Federal gunboats with their rams.

20. 67 citizens of Loudon co., Va., were sent to Richmond on the Central
cars, and committed to one of the military prisons.

21. Santa Fé, N. M., was seized by 100 rebel Texans, under Major C. L.
Pyron.

21. Washington, N. C., occupied by Federal troops under Col. Stevenson.

22. Rebel forces, under Gens. Jackson, Smith and Longstreet, advanced
upon Winchester, Va., where Gen. Shields’ forces engaged them
successfully until night.

22. A skirmish occurred between a detachment of the 6th Kansas and
Quantrall’s band, near Independence, Mo. The latter was routed with 7
killed. The Federals lost 1 killed, and captured 11 prisoners and 20
horses.

22. Lieut. T. A. Budd and Acting Master Mather, attached to Flag-officer
Dupont’s squadron, having imprudently ventured on shore, with a portion
of their men, to examine a rebel earthwork, near Mosquito Inlet, Fla.,
were fired upon by a party of rebels in ambush. Both officers and 5 men
were killed, and several wounded.

23. Morehead City, N. C., was occupied by Federal troops under Gen.
Parke.

23. Battle of Winchester, Va. The fight of yesterday was renewed, and
after a desperate engagement, the rebels were driven from the ground in
disorder, with a loss of 600 killed and wounded, and 300 prisoners.
Federal loss, 100 killed, 400 wounded.

25. Maj. Pyron’s Texans were defeated at Apache Cañon, between Santa Fé
and Fort Union, by Federal troops under Maj. Chivington.

26. A band of rebels attacked 4 companies of State militia at
Humansville, Polk co., Mo., and were defeated by them with a loss of 15
killed and many wounded.

27. Big Bethel, Va., was occupied by the Federal forces.

28. The Federal gunboats and mortars, under Coms. Farragut and Porter,
attacked Forts Jackson and St. Philip, La.

28. Gen. Beauregard concentrated a large force at Corinth, Miss.

28. Morgan’s rebel cavalry captured a train on the Louisville and
Nashville railway. The locomotive was run into a ditch and the cars
destroyed. Col. Currin Pope, of Ky., and several other Federal officers
were taken prisoners.

28. 1,200 U. S. troops, under Col. Slough, engaged the united rebel
forces of Col. Scurry and Maj. Pyron at Valle’s Ranch, N. M., from 10 A.
M. to 5 P. M., when an armistice was agreed on. A flank movement the
next day by Maj. Chivington, with 400 men, threw the rebels into
confusion, and after burning their train, they sought safety in flight.
Rebel loss, 80 killed, 100 wounded, 93 prisoners. Federal loss, 38
killed, 54 wounded, 17 prisoners. The Texans retired to Santa Fé and the
Federals to Fort Union.

29. A detachment of the 1st Iowa cavalry, under Capt. Thompson, overtook
the guerrilla band of Col. Parker, 10 miles west of Warrensburg, Mo. 15
rebels were killed and 25 taken prisoners, among the latter Col. Parker
and Captain Walton. 2 Federals were killed and several wounded.

30. Maj.-Gen. Hunter arrived at Hilton Head, S. C., and assumed command
of the Department of the South, comprising South Carolina, Georgia and
Florida.

31. 220 rebels, captured at Winchester, Va., arrived at Fort Delaware,
Del. Bay.

=Apr. 1.= During a storm at night, Col. Roberts with 50 picked men of
the 42d Illinois, and as many seamen under First Master Johnson, of the
gunboat St. Louis, surprised the rebels at the upper battery of Island
No. 10, and spiked 6 large guns.

1. Col. Carline, commanding the advance of Gen. Steele’s brigade in
Arkansas, had a skirmish at Putnam’s Ferry, in which a rebel lieutenant
and several privates were wounded, and 5 prisoners taken.

4. All of Maryland and Virginia lying between the Mountain Department
and the Blue Ridge, was constituted the military Department of the
Shenandoah, and assigned to Maj.-Gen. Banks; and that portion of
Virginia east of the Blue Ridge and west of the Potomac constituted the
Department of the Rappahannock, and was assigned to Maj.-Gen. McDowell.

1. Gen. Banks advanced from Strasburg, Va., to Woodstock, and thence to
Edenburg, driving the enemy with slight skirmishing. The railway bridge
at Edenburg was burnt by rebels under Gen. Jackson.

1. Heavy bombardment at Island No. 10.

2. Manassas Gap, Va., was occupied by Col. Geary’s troops by strategy,
frustrating a similar attempt by the rebels.

3. U. S. Senate passed a bill for the abolition of slavery in the
District of Columbia, by a vote of 29 yeas, 14 nays.

3. Gen. Steele’s forces in the advance of Gen. Curtis’ army, reached
Putnam, Ark.

4. A schooner containing 24 recruits _en route_ for the rebel army, was
captured on Black creek, near the Potomac river, Va.

4. The Federal gunboat Carondelet ran past the rebel batteries at Island
No. 10, at night, without damage, and arrived at New Madrid.

5. Gen. McClellan’s army advanced through a severe storm from Camp
Misery, and after a tedious march arrived in front of the rebel works,
and commenced the siege of Yorktown, Va. Heavy firing throughout the day
resulted in a loss to the Federals of 3 killed, 22 wounded.

5. Federal transports and barges arrived at New Madrid, Mo., through the
inland channel, cut by Col. Bissel’s engineer corps, thus avoiding the
rebel batteries at No. 10.

6–7. Battle of Pittsburg Landing, Tenn. The combined rebel army, under
Gens. Johnston and Beauregard, attacked Gen. Grant’s army on the morning
of the 6th. Federal loss, 1,614 killed, 7,721 wounded, 3,963
missing—total, 13,508; rebel loss, (Beauregard’s report,) 1,728 killed,
8,012 wounded, 959 missing—total, 10,699.

7. Gen. Pope, with the assistance of the gunboats Pittsburg and
Carondelet, landed his forces on the Tennessee shore, opposite New
Madrid, and took position in rear of Island No. 10, at Tiptonville.

7. Island No. 10 on the Mississippi, and the adjacent works on the Tenn.
shore, were abandoned by the rebels and taken possession of by Col.
Buford’s brigade.

7. Apalachicola, Fla., was captured by the Federal gunboats Mercedita
and Sagamore.

8. Surrender of the rebel army of 5,200 men and all their stores, under
Gens. Mackall and Gantt, to the Federal forces under Gen. Paine, of Gen.
Pope’s division, at Tiptonville, Tenn.

8. Gen. W. T. Sherman was dispatched by Gen. Grant with a large
reconnoitering force on the Corinth, Miss., road. A portion of his force
was routed by a charge of rebel cavalry, and 15 killed and 25 wounded of
the 77th Ohio regiment.

10. Huntsville, Ala., was occupied by Gen. Mitchel’s forces. 200
prisoners, 15 locomotives, and many cars captured.

10. Batteries on Tybee Island commenced the attack of Fort Pulaski, Ga.

10. President Lincoln, by proclamation, recommended the people
throughout the United States on the Sabbath succeeding the receipt of
his Proclamation to return thanks to Almighty God for having vouchsafed
signal victories over rebellious enemies, and also for having averted
the dangers of foreign interference and invasion.

11. Surrender of Fort Pulaski, Ga., after a bombardment of two days.
Federal loss, 1 killed, 1 wounded; rebels, 3 wounded 360 prisoners, 47
guns, 40,000 lbs. powder.

11. The rebel steamers Merrimac, Jamestown and Yorktown, came down
between Newport News and Sewall’s Point, on the Chesapeake, and captured
3 vessels.

11. Severe skirmishing in front of Yorktown, Va., by General Jameson’s
brigade. 20 of the Federals were killed or wounded.

11. Gen. Halleck assumed command of the Federal army at Pittsburg, Tenn.

12. Gen. Milroy, at Monterey, Va., was attacked by a large force of
rebels, whom he repulsed with slight loss.

12. The Charleston and Memphis railway at Chattanooga Junction was
seized by Gen. Mitchel’s forces, and 2,000 rebels and much property were
captured.

12. 4,000 men on five transports, accompanied by the gunboats Lexington
and Tyler, left Pittsburg Landing, Tenn., and proceeded up the Tennessee
river to Eastport, Miss., where they landed, and destroyed two bridges
on the Ohio and Mobile railway, intercepting the rebel communication
with Alabama. A body of Confederate cavalry were met on their return,
who were routed, and four killed.

14. The U. S. forces were withdrawn from Jacksonville, Fla., and the
rebels soon after returning the loyal inhabitants suffered severely, and
many were driven away.

14. The Potomac flotilla ascended the Rappahannock river, Va.,
destroying several batteries. Three vessels were captured.

14. Com. Foote’s mortar boats opened fire on Fort Wright, on the
Mississippi.

15. M. Mercier, French Minister at Washington, paid an official visit to
the rebel authorities at Richmond.

15. Ex-Sec. of War Cameron was arrested at Philadelphia, Pa., on the
suit of Pierce Butler, for alleged illegal arrest.

16. Engagement at Lee’s Mill, near Yorktown, Va. Federal loss, 32 killed
and 100 wounded. Rebels, 25 killed, and 75 w.

17. Mount Jackson, in Shenandoah Co., Va., was occupied by Gen.
Williams’ troops, who captured 50 of Ashby’s rebel cavalry.

17. A large boat was swamped at Castleman’s Ferry, on the Shenandoah
river, Va., by which between 40 and 50 of the 75th Penn. were drowned,
among them Adj. Teatman, Capts. Wilson and Ward.

17. New Market, Va., occupied by Bank’s army, and Fredericksburg by
McDowell’s.

17. Bombardment of Fort Wright, on the Mississippi, by the national
flotilla.

17–24. Bombardment of Fort Jackson and St. Philip, on the Mississippi.

20. Battle of Camden or South Mills, N. C. Gen. Reno’s forces drove the
rebels from their batteries and entrenchments. Federal loss in killed
and wounded, 90.

22. Rebel steamer J. Robb was captured on the Tenn. river by gunboat
Tyler.

24. Yorktown, Va., was shelled by the Federal gunboats.

24. Federal fleet passed Forts Jackson and St. Philip, destroying 13
rebel gunboats, the ram Manassas, and 3 transports.

25. New Orleans captured. Rebel batteries on both sides of the river
destroyed.

25. Maj.-Gen. C. F. Smith died at Savannah, Tenn.

26. Rebel schooner Arctic was captured by U. S. steamer Flambeau.

26. Rebel schooner Belle was captured by U. S. steamer Uncas.

26. Skirmish at Neosho, Mo., between 1st Missouri volunteers, under
Major Hubbard, and rebels and Indians under Cols. Coffee and
Sternwright. Rebels defeated.

26. An advance lunette of the rebels at Yorktown was carried by the 1st
Mass.

26. Capture of Fort Macon, N. C., with its garrison of 450 men under
Col. White, after a bombardment of 11 hours. Rebel loss, 7 killed, 18
wounded. Federal loss, 1 killed, 3 wounded.

28. Forts St. Philip and Jackson, La., surrendered; Forts Livingston and
Pike abandoned, and the rebel iron battery Louisiana blown up.

30. Skirmish of Gen. Mitchel’s forces with the rebels near Bridgeport,
Ala.

=May 2.= The U. S. steamer Brooklyn and several gunboats, left New
Orleans, ascending the Mississippi, to open the river and connect with
Commodore Davis’ fleet.

3. A reconnoissance in force under Gen. Paine from Pope’s division
encountered rebel cavalry pickets near Farmington, Miss., in which 8 of
the latter were killed.

4. Gen. Stoneman’s advance of McClellan’s army encountered a rebel force
near Williamsburg, Va., seven of whom were killed and 25 captured. 2
Feds. killed, 20 w.

5. Battle of Williamsburg, Va. Gen. Kearney’s and Hooker’s divisions
engaged the rebel army under Gen. Longstreet from dawn till dark, when
the Federals were reinforced and rebels defeated. Fed. loss 2,073 in
killed and wounded, and 623 prisoners. Reb. loss heavier, 500 prisoners.

6. Skirmish near Harrisonburg, Va., by Federal troops under Major
Vought.

7. Westpoint, Va. Gen. Franklin’s division of McClellan’s army having
been conveyed by transports to the head of York river, effected a
landing, where he was attacked by a force of rebels, and with the aid of
gunboats defeated the enemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------




                          TRANSCRIBER’S NOTES


 1. Silently corrected obvious typographical errors and variations in
      spelling.
 2. Retained archaic, non-standard, and uncertain spellings as printed.
 3. Enclosed italics font in _underscores_.
 4. Enclosed bold and blackletter font in =equals=.




        
            *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PICTORIAL HISTORY OF THE WAR FOR THE UNION, VOLUME 1 (OF 2) ***
        

    

Updated editions will replace the previous one—the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG™
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away—you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.


START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE

PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg”), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg™ License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg™
electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg™
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg™ electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person
or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B. “Project Gutenberg” is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg™ electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg™
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation (“the
Foundation” or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg™ mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg™
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg™ name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg™ License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg™ work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg™ License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg™ work (any work
on which the phrase “Project Gutenberg” appears, or with which the
phrase “Project Gutenberg” is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
    other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
    whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
    of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online
    at www.gutenberg.org. If you
    are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws
    of the country where you are located before using this eBook.
  
1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase “Project
Gutenberg” associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg™
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg™ electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg™ License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg™
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg™.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg™ License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg™ work in a format
other than “Plain Vanilla ASCII” or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg™ website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original “Plain
Vanilla ASCII” or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg™ License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg™ works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg™ electronic works
provided that:

    • You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
        the use of Project Gutenberg™ works calculated using the method
        you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
        to the owner of the Project Gutenberg™ trademark, but he has
        agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
        within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
        legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
        payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
        Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
        Section 4, “Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
        Literary Archive Foundation.”
    
    • You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
        you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
        does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg™
        License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
        copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
        all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg™
        works.
    
    • You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
        any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
        electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
        receipt of the work.
    
    • You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
        distribution of Project Gutenberg™ works.
    

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg™ trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg™ collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain “Defects,” such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the “Right
of Replacement or Refund” described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg™ trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg™ electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you ‘AS-IS’, WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg™ electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg™
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg™ work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg™ work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg™

Project Gutenberg™ is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg™’s
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg™ collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg™ and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org.

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation’s EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state’s laws.

The Foundation’s business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation’s website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg™ depends upon and cannot survive without widespread
public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state
visit www.gutenberg.org/donate.

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate.

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg™ electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg™ concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg™ eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg™ eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org.

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg™,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


